1
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
 INTRODUCTION
 Crohn’s disease has been increasing in incidence and prevalence 
worldwide. At the same time, the number of therapeutic options 
is rapidly increasing. Th e purpose of this guideline is to review 
Crohn’s disease clinical features and natural history, diagnostics, 
and therapeutic interventions.
 To prepare this guideline, literature searches on the diff erent 
areas were conducted using Ovid MEDLINE from 1946 to 2018, 
EMBASE from 1988 to 2018, and SCOPUS from 1980 to 2018. Th e 
major terms that were searched were Crohn’s disease, infl amma-
tory bowel diseases (IBD), regional ileitis, and regional enteritis. 
Th ese were translated into EMTREE controlled vocabulary as 
enteritis and Crohn’s disease. Th e remainder of the search included 
key words related to the subject area that included clinical features, 
natural history, diagnosis, biomarkers, treatment, and therapy. For 
each of the therapeutic sections, key words included the individ-
ual drug names. Th e results used for analysis were limited to pri-
mary clinical trials, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and prior 
guidelines. Where there were limited data, abstracts were used. In 
many areas reviewed, there were not available clinical trial data, 
and these areas are discussed as summary statements rather than 
GRADE statements.
 To evaluate the level of evidence and strength of recommen-
dations, we used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
 ACG Clinical Guideline: Management of Crohn’s 
Disease in Adults
 Gary R.  Lichtenstein ,  MD, FACG 1 ,  Edward V.  Loft us  Jr ,  MD, FACG 2 ,  Kim L.  Isaacs ,  MD, PhD, FACG 3 ,  Miguel D.  Regueiro ,  MD, FACG 4 , 
 Lauren B.  Gerson ,  MD, MSc, MACG (GRADE Methodologist) 5  ,  † and  Bruce E.  Sands ,  MD, MS, FACG 6 
 Crohn’s disease is an idiopathic inﬂ ammatory disorder of unknown etiology with genetic, immunologic, and 
environmental inﬂ uences. The incidence of Crohn’s disease has steadily increased over the past several decades. The 
diagnosis and treatment of patients with Crohn’s disease has evolved since the last practice guideline was published. 
These guidelines represent the ofﬁ cial practice recommendations of the American College of Gastroenterology and 
were developed under the auspices of the Practice Parameters Committee for the management of adult patients 
with Crohn’s disease. These guidelines are established for clinical practice with the intent of suggesting preferable 
approaches to particular medical problems as established by interpretation and collation of scientiﬁ cally valid 
research, derived from extensive review of published literature. When exercising clinical judgment, health-care 
providers should incorporate this guideline along with patient’s needs, desires, and their values in order to fully 
and appropriately care for patients with Crohn’s disease. This guideline is intended to be ﬂ exible, not necessarily 
indicating the only acceptable approach, and should be distinguished from standards of care that are inﬂ exible 
and rarely violated. To evaluate the level of evidence and strength of recommendations, we used the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system. The Committee reviews guidelines 
in depth, with participation from experienced clinicians and others in related ﬁ elds. The ﬁ nal recommendations 
are based on the data available at the time of the production of the document and may be updated with pertinent 
scientiﬁ c developments at a later time.
 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL is linked to the online version of the paper at  http://www.nature.com/ajg 
 Am J Gastroenterol advance online publication, 27 March 2018; doi: 10.1038/ajg.2018.27 
 1 Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania , 
 Philadelphia ,  Pennsylvania ,  USA ;  2 Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic ,  Rochester ,  Minnesota ,  USA ;  3 Department of Medicine, Division of 
Gastroenterology, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill ,  Chapel Hill ,  North Carolina ,  USA ;  4 Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Cleveland 
Clinic ,  Cleveland ,  Ohio ,  USA ;  5 Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, California Paciﬁ c Medical Center ,  San Francisco ,  California ,  USA ; 
 6 Dr Henry D. Janowitz Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai ,  New York ,  New York ,  USA ;  † Deceased .  Correspondence:  
Gary R. Lichtenstein, MD, FACG,  Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Gastroenterology Division ,  7th Floor, 
South Perelman Building, Room 753, 3400 Civic Center Boulevard ,  Philadelphia ,  Pennsylvania  19104-4283 ,  USA . E-mail:  grl@uphs.upenn.edu 
 Received  11  June  2017 ;  accepted  11  January  2018 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
2
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system ( 1 ). Th e level of 
evidence could range from “high” (implying that further research 
was unlikely to change the authors’ confi dence in the estimate of 
the eff ect), “moderate” (further research would be likely to have 
an impact on the confi dence in the estimate of eff ect), “low” (fur-
ther research would be expected to have an important impact on 
the confi dence in the estimate of the eff ect and would be likely 
to change the estimate), or “very low” (any estimate of eff ect is 
very uncertain). Th e strength of a recommendation was graded 
as “strong” when the desirable eff ects of an intervention clearly 
outweigh the undesirable eff ects and as “conditional” when there 
is uncertainty about the trade-off s. We preferentially used meta-
analyses or systematic reviews when available, followed by clinical 
trials and retrospective cohort studies. To determine the level of 
evidence, we entered data for the papers of highest evidence into 
the GRADE program (accessible at  http://www.gradepro.org ). Th e 
GRADE recommendations statements from this guideline are 
in  Table 1 . Summary statements are descriptive and do not have 
associated evidence-based ratings ( Table 2 ). In this guideline, the 
numbered statements are the GRADE statements and the unnum-
bered statements relate to summary statements.
 CLINICAL FEATURES
 Hallmark/cardinal symptoms of Crohn’s disease include abdominal 
pain, diarrhea, and fatigue; weight loss, fever, growth failure, 
anemia, recurrent fi stulas, or extraintestinal manifestations can 
also be presenting features ( Summary Statement ).
 Th e most common symptom of Crohn’s disease is chronic 
diarrhea, but some patients may not experience this symptom 
( 2 ). Abdominal pain, oft en localized to the right lower quad-
rant of the abdomen and worsened postprandially, is common. 
Fatigue is also a very prevalent symptom in Crohn’s disease and 
is thought to arise from a number of factors including infl amma-
tion itself, anemia, or various vitamin and mineral defi ciencies. 
Some patients will present with constitutional signs or symptoms 
including fever, weight loss or, in the case of younger patients, 
growth failure.
 Crohn’s disease is diagnosed clinically. Th ere are no truly pathog-
nomonic features. Endoscopic, radiographic, and histologic criteria 
with evidence of chronic intestinal infl ammation will be present 
(Summary Statement). 
 Th e clinician must integrate multiple streams of informa-
tion, including history and physical, laboratory tests, endoscopy 
results, pathology fi ndings, and radiographic tests, to arrive at a 
clinical diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. In general, it is the presence 
of chronic intestinal infl ammation that solidifi es a diagnosis of 
Crohn’s disease. Distinguishing Crohn’s disease from ulcerative 
colitis can be challenging when infl ammation is confi ned to the 
colon, but clues to the diagnosis include discontinuous involve-
ment with skip areas, sparing of the rectum, deep/linear/serpigi-
nous ulcers of the colon, strictures, fi stulas, or granulomatous 
infl ammation. Granulomas are present on biopsy in only a minor-
ity of patients. Th e presence of ileitis in a patient with extensive 
colitis (“backwash ileitis”) can also make determination of the 
IBD subtype challenging.
 Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s disease include the classic 
ones such as arthropathy (both axial and peripheral); dermatological 
(including pyoderma gangrenosum and erythema nodosum); ocular 
(including uveitis, scleritis, and episcleritis); and hepatobiliary dis-
ease (i.e., primary sclerosing cholangitis). Other extraintestinal com-
plications of Crohn’s disease include: thromboembolic (both venous 
and arterial); metabolic bone diseases; osteonecrosis; cholelithiasis; 
and nephrolithiasis. A number of other immune-mediated diseases 
are associated with Crohn’s disease, including asthma, chronic bron-
chitis, pericarditis, psoriasis, celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and multiple sclerosis (Summary Statement). 
 A systematic review of population-based cohort studies of 
adult patients with Crohn’s disease identifi ed an increased risk of 
bone fractures (30–40% elevation in risk), and thromboembolism 
(3-fold higher risk) ( 3 ). A variety of extraintestinal manifestations, 
including primary sclerosing cholangitis, ankylosing spondylitis, 
uveitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and erythema nodosum, have 
been observed in patients with Crohn’s disease. Moreover, there 
are weak associations between Crohn’s disease and other immune-
mediated conditions, such as asthma, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthri-
tis, and multiple sclerosis.
 NATURAL HISTORY
 Crohn’s disease, in most cases, is a chronic, progressive, destructive 
disease (Summary Statement). 
 Th e chronic intestinal infl ammation that occurs in Crohn’s dis-
ease can lead to the development over time of intestinal complica-
tions such as strictures, fi stulas, and abscesses. Th ese complications 
can lead to inhibition of intestinal function or to surgery that itself 
can result in some morbidity and loss of intestinal function. A 
scoring system, the Lémann index, has been created to quantify 
the degree of bowel damage incurred by intestinal complications 
and subsequent surgery ( 4 ). Th is index has been shown to be 
reproducible and internally consistent, and median index scores 
rise with disease duration ( 5 ). In a population-based cohort study 
from Olmsted County, Minnesota, of 147 Crohn’s disease patients 
who had undergone at least 1 bowel resection (median follow-up 
per patient, 13.6 years), the median cumulative length of bowel 
resected was 64 cm, and the median rate of bowel resection was 
4.2 cm annually ( 6 ).
 Th e location of Crohn’s disease tends to be stable, but can occasion-
ally extend (Summary Statement). 
 Population-based studies from Norway and Minnesota suggest 
that Crohn’s disease presents with ileal, ileocolonic, or colonic 
disease in roughly one-third of patients each, and that only a small 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
3
 Table 1 .  Summary and strength of recommendations 
 Diagnosis 
  Routine laboratory investigation 
 1.   Fecal calprotectin is a helpful test that should be considered to help differentiate the presence of IBD from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (strong 
recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
  Endoscopy 
 2.   In patients at particularly high risk for colorectal neoplasia (e.g., personal history of dysplasia, primary sclerosing cholangitis), chromoendoscopy should 
be used during colonoscopy, as it may increase the diagnostic yield for detection of colorectal dysplasia, especially compared with standard-deﬁ nition white 
light endoscopy (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 3.   For patients undergoing surveillance colonoscopy there is insufﬁ cient evidence to recommend universal chromoendoscopy for IBD colorectal neoplasia 
surveillance if the endoscopist has access to high-deﬁ nition white light endoscopy (conditional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 4.   Narrow-band imaging should not be used during colorectal neoplasia surveillance examinations for Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, very 
low level of evidence). 
 5.   Endoscopists who are sufﬁ ciently trained and comfortable performing chromoendoscopy may be able to forgo obtaining random surveillance biopsies 
and rely on targeted biopsies alone (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
  Disease modiﬁ ers 
 6.   Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may exacerbate disease activity and should be avoided when possible in patients with Crohn’s disease 
(strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 7.   Cigarette smoking exacerbates disease activity and accelerates disease recurrence and should be avoided. Active smoking cessation programs should 
be encouraged (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 8.   Usage of antibiotics should not be restricted in Crohn’s disease patients in order to prevent disease ﬂ ares (conditional recommendation, very low level 
of evidence). 
 9.   Perceived stress, depression, and anxiety, which are common in IBD, are factors that lead to decreased health-related quality of life in patients with 
Crohn’s disease, and lead to lower adherence to provider recommendations. Assessment and management of stress, depression, and anxiety should be 
included as part of the comprehensive care of the Crohn’s disease patient (strong recommendation, very low level of evidence) 
 Medical Therapy 
  Mild-to-moderately severe disease/low-risk disease 
 10.   Sulfasalazine is effective for treating symptoms of colonic Crohn’s disease that is mild to moderately active and can be used as treatment for this 
patient population (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 11.   Oral mesalamine has not consistently been demonstrated to be effective compared with placebo for induction of remission and achieving mucosal 
healing in patients with active Crohn’s disease and should not be used to treat patients with active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate level of 
evidence). 
 12.   Controlled ileal release budesonide at a dose of 9 mg once daily is effective and should be used for induction of symptomatic remission for patients 
with mild-to-moderate ileocecal Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 13.   Metronidazole is not more effective than placebo as therapy for luminal inﬂ ammatory Crohn’s disease and should not be used as primary therapy 
(conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 14.   Ciproﬂ oxacin has shown similar efﬁ cacy to mesalamine in active luminal Crohn’s disease but has not been shown to be more effective than placebo to 
induce remission in Crohn’s disease and should not be used as therapy for luminal inﬂ ammatory Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, very low level 
of evidence). 
 15.   Antimycobacterial therapy has not been shown to be effective for induction or for maintenance of remission or mucosal healing in patients with 
Crohn’s disease and should not be used as primary therapy (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 16.   For patients with low risk of progression, treatment of active symptoms with anti-diarrheals, other non-speciﬁ c medications, and dietary manipulation, 
along with careful observation for inadequate symptom relief, worsening inﬂ ammation, or disease progression, is acceptable (strong recommendation, very low 
level of evidence). 
  Moderate-to-severe disease/moderate-to-high-risk disease 
 17.   Oral corticosteroids are effective and can be used for short-term use in alleviating signs and symptoms of moderate to severely active Crohn’s disease 
(strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 18.   Conventional corticosteroids do not consistently achieve mucosal healing and should be used sparingly (weak recommendation, low level of evi-
dence). 
 19.   Azathioprine (at doses of 1.5–2.5 mg/kg/day) and 6-mercaptopurine (at doses of 0.75–1.5 mg/kg day) are not more effective than placebo to induce 
short-term symptomatic remission and should not be used in this manner (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 20.   Thiopurines (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine) are effective and should be considered for use for steroid sparing in Crohn’s disease (strong recom-
mendation, low level of evidence). 
Table 1 continued on following page
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
4
 Table 1 .  Continued 
 21.   Azathioprine and 6-mercaptourine are effective therapies and should be considered for treatment of patients with Crohn’s disease for maintenance of 
remission (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 22.   Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) testing should be considered before initial use of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine to treat patients with 
Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 23.   Methotrexate (up to 25 mg once weekly IM or SC) is effective and should be considered for use in alleviating signs and symptoms in patients with 
steroid-dependent Crohn’s disease and for maintaining remission (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 24.   Anti-TNF agents (inﬂ iximab, adalimumab, certolizumab pegol) should be used to treat Crohn’s disease that is resistant to treatment with corticoster-
oids (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 25.   Anti-TNF agents should be given for Crohn’s disease refractory to thiopurines or methotrexate (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 26.   Combination therapy of inﬂ iximab with immunomodulators (thiopurines) is more effective than treatment with either immunomodulators alone or 
inﬂ iximab alone in patients who are naive to those agents (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 27.   For patients with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease and objective evidence of active disease, anti-integrin therapy (with vedolizumab) with 
or without an immunomodulator is more effective than placebo and should be considered to be used for induction of symptomatic remission in patients with 
Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 28.   Natalizumab is more effective than placebo and should be considered to be used for induction of symptomatic response and remission in patients 
with active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 29.   Natalizumab should be used for maintenance of natalizumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease only if serum antibody to John Cunningham (JC) 
virus is negative. Testing for anti-JC virus antibody should be repeated every 6 months and treatment stopped if the result is positive. (strong recommendation, 
moderate level of evidence). 
 30.   Ustekinumab should be given for moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease patients who failed previous treatment with corticosteroids, thiopurines, metho-
trexate, or anti-TNF inhibitors or who have had no prior exposure to anti-TNF inhibitors (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 31.   Cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus should not be used for Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
  Severe/fulminant disease 
 32.   Intravenous corticosteroids should be used to treat severe or fulminant Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 33.   Anti-TNF agents (inﬂ iximab, adalimumab, certolizumab pegol) can be considered to treat severely active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, 
moderate level of evidence). 
 34.   Inﬂ iximab may be administered to treat fulminant Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 Fistulizing Crohn’s Disease 
  Perianal/ﬁ stulizing disease 
 35.   Inﬂ iximab is effective and should be considered in treating perianal ﬁ stulas in Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 36.   Inﬂ iximab may be effective and should be considered in treating enterocutaneous and rectovaginal ﬁ stulas in Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, 
moderate level of evidence) 
 37.   Adalimumab and certolizumab pegol may be effective and should be considered in treating perianal ﬁ stulas in Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, 
low level of evidence). 
 38.   Thiopurines (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine) may be effective and should be considered in treating ﬁ stulizing Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, 
low level of evidence). 
 39.   Tacrolimus can be administered for short-term treatment of perianal and cutaneous ﬁ stulas in Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate 
level of evidence). 
 40.   Antibiotics (imidazoles) may be effective and should be considered in treating simple perianal ﬁ stulas (strong recommendation, moderate level of 
evidence). 
 41.   The addition of antibiotics to inﬂ iximab is more effective than inﬂ iximab alone and should be considered in treating perianal ﬁ stulas (strong 
recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 42.   Drainage of abscesses (surgically or percutaneously) should be undertaken before treatment of ﬁ stulizing Crohn’s disease with anti-TNF agents 
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 43.   Placement of setons increases the efﬁ cacy of inﬂ iximab and should be considered in treating perianal ﬁ stulas (strong recommendation, moderate 
level of evidence). 
 Maintenance Therapy of Luminal Crohn’s Disease 
 44.  Once remission is induced with corticosteroids, a thiopurine or methotrexate should be considered (strong recommendation, moderate level of 
evidence). 
 45.  Patients who are steroid dependent should be started on thiopurines or methotrexate with or without anti-TNF therapy (strong recommendation, moder-
ate level of evidence). 
Table 1 continued on following page
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
5
minority of patients (6–14%) will have a change in disease location 
over time ( 7–9 ).
 Most, but not all, patients with Crohn’s disease will present with 
non-penetrating, non-stricturing disease behavior, but up to half 
of patients would have developed an intestinal complication (i.e., 
stricture, abscess, fi stula, or phlegmon) within 20 years of diagno-
sis. Patients with ileal, ileocolonic, or proximal gastrointestinal ( GI) 
involvement are signifi cantly more likely than those with isolated 
colonic disease to progress to an intestinal complication. Extensive 
anatomic involvement and deep ulcerations are other risk factors for 
progression to intestinal complications (Summary Statement). 
 Multiple population-based cohorts of Crohn’s disease have dem-
onstrated that the majority of patients (between 56% and 81%) 
have infl ammatory disease behavior at diagnosis, whereas between 
5% and 25% each present with stricturing or penetrating disease 
behavior ( 9 ). A population-based study from Olmsted County 
showed that the cumulative risk of developing an intestinal com-
plication among those presenting with infl ammatory behavior was 
51% at 20 years aft er diagnosis .( 10 ). Multivariate analysis demon-
strated that ileal, ileocolonic, or upper GI involvement, relative to 
colonic involvement, were signifi cantly associated with faster time 
to the development of intestinal complications.
 Over long periods of observation, only 20–30% of patients with 
Crohn’s disease will have a nonprogressive or indolent course. 
Th erefore, the majority of patients will require active eff ort to iden-
tify therapies that achieve adequate control of bowel infl ammation 
(Summary Statement). 
 Features that are associated with a high risk for progressive disease 
burden include young age at diagnosis ( 11 ) , initial extensive bowel 
involvement, ileal/ileocolonic involvement, perianal/severe rectal 
disease, and patients presenting with a penetrating or stenosis disease 
phenotype ( 12 ) . Visceral adiposity may be a marker for increased 
risk of penetrating disease ( 13 )  (Summary Statement). 
 Symptoms of Crohn’s disease do not correlate well with the pres-
ence of active infl ammation, and therefore should not be the sole 
 Table 1 .  Continued 
 46.  Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid has not been demonstrated to be effective for maintenance of medically induced remission in patients with Crohn’s disease, 
and is not recommended for long-term treatment (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 47.  Corticosteroids are not effective for maintenance of medically induced remission in Crohn’s disease and should not be used for long-term treatment 
(strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 48.  Budesonide should not be used to maintain remission of Crohn’s disease beyond 4 months (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 49.  Anti-TNF therapy, speciﬁ cally inﬂ iximab, adalimumab, and certolizumab pegol, should be used to maintain remission of anti-TNF-induced remission 
(strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 50.  Anti-TNF monotherapy is effective at maintaining anti-TNF induced remission, but because of the potential for immunogenicity and loss of response, 
combination with azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine or methotrexate should be considered (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 51.  Vedolizumab should be used for maintenance of remission of vedolizumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, moder-
ate level of evidence). 
 52.  Natalizumab should be considered for maintaining remission of natalizumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease patients only if John Cunningham 
(JC) virus is negative (conditional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 53.  Ustekinumab should be use for maintenance of remission of ustekinumab-induced response of Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, moder-
ate level of evidence). 
 Postoperative Crohn’s Disease 
 54.  All patients who have Crohn’s disease should quit smoking (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 55.  Mesalamine is of limited beneﬁ t in preventing postoperative Crohn’s disease, but in addition to no treatment is an option for patients with an isolated 
ileal resection and no risk factors for recurrence (conditional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 56.  Imidazole antibiotics (metronidazole and ornidazole) at doses between 1 and 2 g/day can be used after small intestinal resection in Crohn’s disease 
patients to prevent recurrence (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 57.  Thiopurines may be used to prevent clinical and endoscopic recurrence and are more effective than mesalamine or placebo. However, they are not 
effective at preventing severe endoscopic recurrence (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 58.  In high-risk patients, anti-TNF agents should be started within 4 weeks of surgery in order to prevent postoperative Crohn’s disease recurrence 
(conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 59.  Although data are lacking in postoperative Crohn’s disease, anti-TNF therapy should be combined with an immunomodulator to decrease 
immunogenicity and decrease loss of response (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
  When to refer to surgery 
 60.   An intra-abdominal abscess should be treated with antibiotics and a drainage procedure, either radiographically or surgically (conditional recommen-
dation, low level of evidence). 
 IBD, inﬂ ammatory bowel disease; IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
6
 Table 2 .  Summary statements 
 Clinical Features 
 1.  Hallmark/cardinal symptoms of Crohn’s disease include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and fatigue; weight loss, fever, growth failure, anemia, recurrent ﬁ stu-
las, or extraintestinal manifestations can also be presenting features. 
 2.  Crohn’s disease is diagnosed clinically. There are no truly pathognomonic features. Endoscopic, radiographic, and histologic criteria with evidence of 
chronic intestinal inﬂ ammation will be present. 
 3.  Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s disease include the classic ones such as arthropathy (both axial and peripheral); dermatological (including 
pyoderma gangrenosum and erythema nodosum); ocular (including uveitis, scleritis, and episcleritis); and hepatobiliary disease (i.e., primary sclerosing chol-
angitis). Other extraintestinal complications of Crohn’s disease include: thromboembolic (both venous and arterial); metabolic bone diseases; osteonecrosis; 
cholelithiasis; and nephrolithiasis. A number of other immune-mediated diseases are associated with Crohn’s disease, including asthma, chronic bronchitis, 
pericarditis, psoriasis, celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. 
 Natural History 
 4.  Crohn’s disease, in most cases, is a chronic, progressive, destructive disease. 
 5.  The location of Crohn’s disease tends to be stable, but can occasionally extend. 
 6.  Most, but not all, patients with Crohn’s disease will present with nonpenetrating, nonstricturing disease behavior, but up to half of patients would have 
developed an intestinal complication (i.e., stricture, abscess, ﬁ stula, or phlegmon) within 20 years of diagnosis. Patients with ileal, ileocolonic, or proximal GI 
involvement are signiﬁ cantly more likely than those with isolated colonic disease to progress to an intestinal complication. Extensive anatomic involvement and 
deep ulcerations are other risk factors for progression to intestinal complications. 
 7.  Over long periods of observation, only 20–30% of patients with Crohn’s disease will have a nonprogressive or indolent course. Therefore, the majority of 
patients will require active effort to identify therapies that achieve adequate control of bowel inﬂ ammation. 
 8.  Features that are associated with a high risk for progressive disease burden include young age at diagnosis ( 11 ), initial extensive bowel involvement, ileal/
ileocolonic involvement, perianal/severe rectal disease, and patients presenting with a penetrating or stenosis disease phenotype ( 12 ). Visceral adiposity may 
be a marker for increased risk of penetrating disease ( 13 ). 
 9.  Symptoms of Crohn’s disease do not correlate well with the presence of active inﬂ ammation, and therefore should not be the sole guide for therapy. Objec-
tive evaluation by endoscopic or cross-sectional imaging should be undertaken periodically to avoid errors of under- or over treatment. 
 10.  Perianal ﬁ stulizing Crohn’s disease occurs in up to one-quarter of patients. 
 11.  Symptoms of Crohn’s disease occur in most cases as a chronic, intermittent course; only a minority of patients will have continuously active symptomatic 
disease or prolonged symptomatic remission. 
 12.  In the absence of immunomodulator or biologic treatment, steroid dependency and/or resistance occurs in up to half of patients. 
 13.  Up to 80% of patients with Crohn’s disease require hospitalization at some point during their clinical course, but the annual hospitalization rate de-
creases in later years after diagnosis. 
 14.  The 10-year cumulative risk of major abdominal surgery in Crohn’s disease is 40% to 55%, although recent studies performed in the biologic era 
suggest that the 10-year risk may have decreased to 30%. The 10-year risk of a second resection after the ﬁ rst is 35%, although again more recent studies 
suggest that this may have dropped to closer to 30%. 
 15.  In Crohn’s disease, the 5-year rate of symptomatic postoperative recurrence is ∼ 50%. 
 16.  Overall mortality in Crohn’s disease is slightly increased, with a standardized mortality ratio of 1.4 times that of the general population. Causes of excess 
mortality include gastrointestinal disease, gastrointestinal cancer, lung disease, and lung cancer. 
 Intestinal Malignancy 
 17.  Patients with colonic involvement are at increased risk of colorectal cancer, and risk factors include duration of disease, extent of colonic involvement, 
primary sclerosing cholangitis, family history of colorectal cancer, and severity of ongoing colonic inﬂ ammation. 
 18.  Patients with small bowel involvement are at increased risk of small bowel adenocarcinoma that can be difﬁ cult to diagnose preoperatively. 
 Diagnosis 
  Routine laboratory investigation 
 19.   Initial laboratory investigation should include evaluation for inﬂ ammation, anemia, dehydration, and malnutrition. 
 20.   In patients who have symptoms of active Crohn’s disease, stool testing should be performed to include fecal pathogens,  Clostridium difﬁ cile testing, 
and may include studies that identify gut inﬂ ammation such as a fecal calprotectin. 
  Genetic testing 
 21.   Genetic testing is not indicated to establish the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. 
 22.   Certain genetic variants are associated with different phenotypic expressions in Crohn’s disease but testing remains a research tool at this time. 
  Serologic markers of IBD 
 23.   Routine use of serologic markers of IBD to establish the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is not indicated. 
Table 2 continued on following page
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
7
 Table 2 .  Continued 
  Endoscopy 
 24.   Ileocolonoscopy with biopsies should be performed in the assessment of patients with suspected Crohn’s disease. 
 25.   Disease distribution and severity should be documented at the time of diagnosis. Biopsies of uninvolved mucosa are recommended to identify extent 
of histologic disease. 
 26.   Upper endoscopy should only be performed in patients with upper gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. 
 27.   Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) is a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of patients with small bowel Crohn’s disease in patients in whom there is a high 
index of suspicion of disease. 
 28.   Patients with obstructive symptoms should have small bowel imaging and/or patency capsule evaluation before VCE to decrease risk of capsule reten-
tion. 
 29.   Deep enteroscopy is not part of routine diagnostic testing in patients with suspected Crohn’s disease, but may provide additional information in pa-
tients who require biopsy/sampling of small bowel tissue to make a diagnosis. 
  Imaging studies 
 30.   Small bowel imaging should be performed as part of the initial diagnostic workup for patients with suspected Crohn’s disease. 
 31.   Computed tomography enterography (CTE) is sensitive for the detection of small bowel disease in patients with Crohn’s disease and is comparable to 
magnetic resonance enterography (MRE). 
 32.   Because of the absence of any radiation exposure, MRE should be used preferentially in young patients (<35 years) and in patients in whom it is likely 
that serial exams will need to be performed. 
 33.   The decision for which small bowel imaging study to use is in part related to the expertise of the institution and the clinical presentation of the patient. 
 34.   Cross-sectional imaging with MRI of the pelvis and/or endoscopic ultrasound may be used to further characterize perianal Crohn’s disease and peri-
rectal abscesses. 
 35.   If an intra-abdominal abscess is suspected, cross-sectional imaging of the abdomen and pelvis should be performed. 
  Determining disease activity and distribution 
 36.   IBD type, location, and disease activity should be documented in the medical record. 
  Monitoring disease activity 
 37.   Fecal calprotectin and fecal lactoferrin measurements may have an adjunctive role in monitoring disease activity. 
 38.   Serum CRP is relatively nonspeciﬁ c for the inﬂ ammation of Crohn’s disease, but in select patients serial measurements may have a role in monitoring 
disease activity and response to therapy. 
 39.   Periodic cross-sectional imaging (CTE, MRE) may be considered in monitoring response to therapy in certain patients with small bowel Crohn’s disease. 
 40.   Mucosal healing as determined by endoscopy is a goal of therapy. 
   a. Endoscopic scores have been developed that are reliable in measuring degree of mucosal healing and may be used to monitor response to therapy. 
   b. Evaluation of the ileum for post-operative endoscopic recurrence by colonoscopy within a year after ileocolonic resection may help guide further 
therapy. 
 Management of Disease 
  Moderate-to-severe disease/moderate-to-high-risk disease 
 41.   Systemic corticosteroids are ineffective for maintenance therapy in patients with Crohn’s disease. Topical corticosteroids, although commonly used in 
Crohn’s disease, are of limited beneﬁ t. 
 42.   Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or methotrexate (15 mg once weekly) may be used in treatment of active Crohn’s disease and as adjunctive therapy 
for reducing immunogenicity against biologic therapy. 
  Biosimilar anti-TNF agents 
 43.   Biosimilar inﬂ iximab and biosimilar adalimumab are effective treatments for patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease and can be used for  de 
novo induction and maintenance therapy. 
 44.   Insufﬁ cient data exist to support the safety and efﬁ cacy of switching patients in stable disease maintenance from one biosimilar to another of the same 
biosimilar molecule. 
 Fistulizing Crohn’s Disease 
  Perianal/ﬁ stulizing disease 
 45.   The presence of a perianal abscess in Crohn’s disease should prompt surgical drainage. 
 Maintenance Therapy of Luminal Crohn’s Disease 
 46.  No maintenance treatment is a treatment option for some patients with asymptomatic (silent), mild Crohn’s disease. 
Table 2 continued on following page
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
8
guide for therapy. Objective evaluation by endoscopic or cross-sec-
tional imaging should be undertaken periodically to avoid errors of 
under- or overtreatment (Summary Statement). 
 Perianal fi stulizing Crohn’s disease occurs in up to one-quarter of 
patients (Summary Statement). 
 In population-based cohorts, the frequency of perianal fi stulas is 
between 10 and 26%, and the cumulative risk was 26% at 20 years 
aft er diagnosis in one cohort ( 9,14,15 ). Perianal disease at diagno-
sis may indicate a more severe clinical course of Crohn’s disease.
 Symptoms of Crohn’s disease occur in most cases as a chronic, inter-
mittent course; only a minority of patients will have continuously 
active symptomatic disease or prolonged symptomatic remission 
(Summary Statement). 
 A population-based study from Olmsted County, Minnesota, 
modeled the lifetime course of Crohn’s disease in various disease 
states using a Markov model; the model was unique in that the tran-
sition probabilities between disease states were derived by mapping 
disease states to the actual chronological history of each patient ( 16 ). 
Over the lifetime disease course, a representative patient spent 24% 
of the duration of their disease in a state of medical remission, 27% 
in mild disease, 1% in severe drug-responsive disease, 4% in severe 
drug-dependent disease, 2% in severe drug-refractory disease, 1% 
in surgery, and 41% in postsurgical remission. In the 1962–1987 
Copenhagen County cohort, within the fi rst year aft er diagnosis, 
the proportions of patients with high activity, low activity, and clini-
cal remission were 80%, 15%, and 5%, respectively ( 17 ). However, 
aft er the fi rst year through 25 years, a decreasing proportion of high 
activity (30%), increasing proportion of remission (55%), and sta-
ble proportion of mild activity (15%) were observed.
 In the absence of immunomodulator or biologic treatment, steroid 
dependency and/or resistance occurs in up to half of patients 
(Summary Statement). 
 Population-based studies from Denmark and Minnesota 
suggest that between 43 and 56% of Crohn’s disease patients 
received corticosteroids in the prebiologic era, and that over half 
of these patients were either steroid dependent, steroid refrac-
tory, or required surgical resection within the subsequent year 
( 18,19 ).
 Up to 80% of patients with Crohn’s disease require hospitalization 
at some point during their clinical course, but the annual hospitali-
zation rate decreases in later years aft er diagnosis (Summary State-
ment). 
 An older Copenhagen County study suggested that 83% of 
patients were hospitalized within 1 year of diagnosis, and the 
annual rate of hospitalization thereaft er was about 20% ( 18 ). Up 
to 70% of Olmsted County patients were hospitalized at least once, 
and the cumulative risk of hospitalization in the prebiologic era 
was 62% at 10 years. Th e annual rate of hospitalization was highest 
in the fi rst year aft er diagnosis ( 15 ).
 Th e 10-year cumulative risk of major abdominal surgery in Crohn’s 
disease is 40% to 55%, although recent studies performed in the bio-
logic era suggest that the 10-year risk may have decreased to 30%. 
Th e 10-year risk of a second resection aft er the fi rst is 35%, although 
again more recent studies suggest that this may have dropped to 
closer to 30% (Summary Statement). 
 In a systematic review of 30 publications examining major 
abdominal surgical risk in Crohn’s disease, the cumulative 
incidence of surgery was 46.6% at 10 years, and that this risk 
was reported to be lower, under 40%, among patients who 
had been diagnosed aft er 1980 ( 20 ). Another systematic 
review examined the risk of a second resection among those 
Crohn’s disease patients who had undergone a fi rst resec-
tion, and this was estimated to be 35% at 10 years overall, but 
signifi cantly lower among those patients diagnosed aft er 
1980 ( 21 ).
 Table 2 .  Continued 
 47.  Surgery may be considered for patients with symptomatic Crohn’s disease localized to a short segment of bowel. 
 48.  Data are lacking demonstrating the effectiveness of sulfasalazine or of olsalazine for the maintenance of medically induced remission in patients with 
Crohn’s disease and are these agents not recommended for long-term treatment. 
 Postoperative Crohn’s Disease 
 49.  Prophylactic treatment is recommended after small intestinal resection in patients with risk factors for recurrence. 
 50.  Risk factors for postoperative Crohn’s disease recurrence should be taken into account when deciding on treatment. 
  When to refer to surgery 
 51.   Surgery is required to treat enteric complications of Crohn’s disease. 
 52.   A resection of a segment of diseased intestine is the most common surgery for a Crohn’s disease. 
 53.   Crohn’s disease patients who develop an abdominal abscess should undergo a surgical resection. However, some may respond to medical therapy 
after radiologically guided drainage. 
 CRP, C-reactive protein; GI, gastrointestinal; IBD, inﬂ ammatory bowel disease; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
9
no single laboratory test that can make an unequivocal diagnosis 
of CD. Th e sequence of testing is dependent on presenting clinical 
features.
 Routine laboratory investigation
 Initial laboratory investigation should include evaluation for 
infl ammation, anemia, dehydration, and malnutrition (Summary 
Statement). 
 In patients who have symptoms of active Crohn’s disease, stool testing 
should be performed to include fecal pathogens, Clostridium diffi  cile 
testing, and may include studies that identify gut infl ammation such 
as a fecal calprotectin (Summary Statement). 
 Recommendations
 1 .  Fecal calprotectin is a helpful test that should be consid-
ered to help diff erentiate the presence of IBD from irritable 
bowel syndrome (strong recommendation, moderate level 
of evidence). 
 Patients presenting with suspected CD oft en will show labora-
tory evidence of infl ammatory activity. Anemia and an elevated 
platelet count are the most common changes seen in the com-
plete blood count ( 32,33 ). Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) is 
an acute-phase reactant produced by the liver that goes up with 
infl ammation seen in a subset of patients with CD. It has a short 
half-life of 19 hours. Because of its short half-life, serum concen-
trations decrease quickly, making CRP a useful marker to detect 
and monitor infl ammation (see later section) ( 34,35 ). Erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate is also a nonspecifi c measure of infl ammation 
that may be elevated in patients with Crohn’s disease. Erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate may be useful in an individual patient but does 
not discriminate IBD patients from those with irritable bowel 
syndrome or healthy controls ( 36 ). Up to 40% of IBD patients 
with mild infl ammation may have a normal CRP and erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate that may limit the usefulness of these markers 
in monitoring some patients ( 37 ). Signs and symptoms of bowel 
infl ammation related to IBD overlap with infectious enteritis and 
colitis. Stool studies for fecal pathogens and  C. diffi  cile will help 
direct diagnosis and management. Fecal calprotectin is a calcium 
binding protein that is derived from neutrophils and plays a role in 
the regulation of infl ammation. Fecal lactoferrin is an iron binding 
protein found in secondary granules of neutrophils. Th ese serve as 
noninvasive markers of intestinal infl ammation. Th ey are useful in 
diff erentiating patients with IBD from those with irritable bowel 
syndrome ( 38–42 ). Fecal markers may also be useful in monitor-
ing disease activity and response to treatment (see later section).
 Genetic testing
 Genetic testing is not indicated to establish the diagnosis of Crohn’s 
disease (Summary Statement). 
 Certain genetic variants are associated with diff erent phenotypic 
expressions in Crohn’s disease but testing remains a research tool at 
this time (Summary Statement). 
 In Crohn’s disease, the 5-year rate of symptomatic post-operative 
recurrence is ∼50% (Summary Statement). 
 Among Crohn’s disease patients who undergo major abdominal 
surgery, the 5-year cumulative risk of clinical recurrence is 40% to 
50% ( 22,23 ). Th e risk of endoscopic recurrence approaches 90%. 
Risk factors for recurrent Crohn’s disease postoperatively include 
cigarette smoking, shorter duration of disease before operation, 
more than one resection, and penetrating complications.
 Overall mortality in Crohn’s disease is slightly increased, with a 
standardized mortality ratio of 1.4 times that of the general popula-
tion. Causes of excess mortality include GI disease, GI cancer, lung 
disease, and lung cancer (Summary Statement). 
 A 2007 meta-analysis of 13 studies of Crohn’s disease mortality 
yielded a pooled standardized mortality ratio of 1.5 ( 24 ). Th ere 
was a nonsignifi cant trend for decreased mortality in more recent 
studies. In a 2013 meta-analysis, the pooled standardized mortality 
ratio for Crohn’s disease was 1.46, and slightly lower at 1.38 when 
restricted to population-based and inception studies ( 25 ). Several 
studies have demonstrated an association between current use of 
corticosteroids and increased mortality in Crohn’s disease ( 26,27 ).
 INTESTINAL MALIGNANCY
 Patients with colonic involvement are at increased risk of colorectal 
cancer, and risk factors include duration of disease, extent of colonic 
involvement, primary sclerosing cholangitis, family history of 
colorectal cancer, and severity of ongoing colonic infl ammation 
(Summary Statement). 
 Crohn’s disease patients with colitis are at increased risk of 
colorectal cancer ( 28 ). Similar to ulcerative colitis, risk factors for 
colorectal cancer include duration of Crohn’s, primary sclerosing 
cholangitis, and family history of colorectal cancer.
 Patients with small bowel involvement are at increased risk of small 
bowel adenocarcinoma that can be diffi  cult to diagnose preopera-
tively (Summary Statement). 
 Th e relative risk of small bowel adenocarcinoma in patients 
with Crohn’s disease is markedly elevated (at least 18-fold), 
although the absolute risk remains low, in the order of 0.3 cases 
per 1,000 patient-years ( 29 ). Th e increased risk is thought to arise 
from longstanding chronic infl ammation.
 DIAGNOSIS
 Th e diagnosis of Crohn’s disease (CD) is based on a combination 
of clinical presentation and endoscopic, radiologic, histologic, 
and pathologic fi ndings that demonstrate some degree of focal, 
asymmetric, and transmural granulomatous infl ammation of the 
luminal GI tract ( 30,31 ). Laboratory testing is complementary in 
assessing disease severity and complications of disease. Th ere is 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
10
 CD is a heterogeneous disease with complex interactions 
between genetics, environmental exposures, and the intestinal 
microbiome. To date, there are over 200 genetic loci associated 
with IBD and greater than 71 CD susceptibility loci that have been 
identifi ed through large-scale genome-wide association studies 
( 43–45 ). As more genetically diverse populations are studied, this 
is likely to expand. Examples of single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
that confer susceptibility to CD include sequences in the NOD2 
gene, the interleukin (IL)-23 receptor gene, and the autophagy-
related 16-like 1 (ATG16L1) gene ( 46 ). Th ese genes play a role in 
innate immunity and regulation of the epithelial barrier ( 47 ). Th ese 
susceptibility variants are biologically important in understanding 
the pathophysiology of CD, but there is no single variant that has 
a high enough frequency in the CD population to make it diag-
nostically useful. Th ere is signifi cant variation in the prevalence 
of susceptibility genes between various racial/ethnic groups—for 
example, NOD2 and IL23R variants are very uncommon in East 
Asian populations ( 43 ). Th ere are genetic variants that are associ-
ated with disease phenotype. NOD2 variants are predictors of a 
more complicated disease behavior including ileal involvement, 
stenosis, and penetrating disease behaviors and the need for sur-
gery ( 48 ). Th ese variants are also associated with early disease 
onset ( 49 ). IL-12B variants are associated with the need for early 
surgery ( 50 ). NOD2 testing is commercially available for three of 
the most common variants seen in CD. Although identifi cation of 
these variants may identify patients who are likely to have more 
aggressive CD, this laboratory test has not been routinely used 
clinically and remains a research tool. Ultimately, we may be able 
to use genetic testing to characterize patient’s disease behavior and 
guide early therapy ( 51 ).
 Serologic markers of IBD
 Routine use of serologic markers of IBD to establish the diagnosis of 
Crohn’s disease is not indicated (Summary Statement). 
 Because of the heterogeneous nature of IBD there has been 
extensive research directed toward fi nding immunologic markers 
that would assist in disease diagnosis. Th ese studies have focused 
on antibodies to microbial antigens and autoantibodies ( Supple-
mentary Information online). Anti-glycan antibodies are more 
prevalent in CD than in ulcerative colitis but have a low sensitivity, 
making their use in diagnosis less helpful ( 52 ).
 Endoscopy
 Ileocolonoscopy with biopsies should be performed in the assessment 
of patients with suspected Crohn’s disease (Summary Statement). 
 Disease distribution and severity should be documented at the time 
of diagnosis. Biopsies of uninvolved mucosa are recommended to 
identify extent of histologic disease (Summary Statement). 
 Colonoscopy with intubation of the terminal ileum and biopsy 
is recommended as part of the initial evaluation of patients with 
suspected IBD. Over 80% of patients with IBD will have mucosal 
involvement within the reach of the colonoscope. Ileal intubation 
rates via colonoscopy are as high as 80–97% in patients in whom 
the cecum is reached ( 53 ). Small bowel follow-through barium 
examinations of the terminal ileum may both over- and under-
represent disease of the ileum ( 53,54 ). Direct evaluation of the 
ileum will complement radiographic fi ndings in the diagnosis of 
CD. Mucosal changes suggestive of CD include mucosal nodu-
larity, edema, ulcerations, friability, and stenosis ( 53,55 ). Classi-
cal granulomatous infl ammation is seen in a minority of patients 
(up to 33%) with CD, and is helpful, but not required, for diagno-
sis. Disease distribution of endoscopic and histologic fi ndings is 
important to document at the time of diagnosis, as this has impli-
cations on screening for colorectal cancer, disease prognosis, and 
ultimately aff ect therapeutic decision making. Attempts to quantify 
the distribution and severity of mucosal involvement of the colon 
and the ileum in patients with CD have led to the development of 
multiple endoscopic scoring systems, including the Crohn’s Dis-
ease Endoscopic Index of Severity (CDEIS) and the Simple Endo-
scopic Score for Crohn’s disease (SES-CD) ( 56,57 ). Th e SES-CD is 
the least cumbersome to use and has been incorporated into many 
commercial endoscopic reporting systems ( 57 ) ( Supplementary 
Information online). Studies using central endoscopy readers 
have shown excellent intra- and inter-rater reliability ( 58 ) (see later 
section).
 Upper endoscopy should only be performed in patients with upper GI 
signs and symptoms (Summary Statement). 
 Th e presence of CD of the upper GI tract is oft en underesti-
mated, with most studies in adults suggesting that the prevalence 
range is 0.3–5% ( 59 ). Looking at the incidence prospectively, this 
number is higher, in the range of 16% of patients showing endo-
scopic and histologic changes consistent with CD. Of this group of 
patients, only ∼ 37% were symptomatic at the time of evaluation 
( 60 ). Routine endoscopic evaluation in asymptomatic CD patients 
is associated with mild endoscopically visible infl ammation in up 
to 64% of patients and histologic infl ammation in up to 70% of 
patients ( 61 ). Th ese studies have been carried out predominately 
in children. Despite these fi ndings there does not appear to be any 
clinical signifi cance related to these mild changes ( 62 ). Endoscopic 
features suggestive of CD include mucosal nodularity, ulceration 
(both aphthous and linear), antral thickening, and duodenal stric-
tures ( 63 ). Histologic changes may include granulomatous infl am-
mation, focal cryptitis of the duodenum, and focally enhanced 
gastritis ( 60 ).
 Video capsule endoscopy is a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of 
patients with small bowel Crohn’s disease in patients in whom there 
is a high index of suspicion of disease (Summary Statement). 
 Patients with obstructive symptoms should have small bowel imag-
ing and/or patency capsule evaluation before video capsule endos-
copy to decrease risk of capsule retention (Summary Statement). 
 Small bowel capsule endoscopy allows for direct visualization of 
the mucosa of the small intestine. Isolated small bowel involvement 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
11
 3 .  For patients undergoing surveillance colonoscopy there 
is insuffi  cient evidence to recommend universal chro-
moendoscopy for IBD colorectal neoplasia surveillance, if 
the endoscopist has access to high-defi nition white light 
endoscopy (conditional recommendation, moderate level of 
evidence). 
 Surveillance colonoscopy is suggested for patients who have a 
minimum of 8 years of disease who have 30% or more of their colon 
involved. Th e risk of neoplasia in Crohn’s colitis increases with both 
the duration and the extent of disease. Th ose individuals with pri-
mary sclerosing cholangitis should initiate surveillance colonoscopy 
at the time of their diagnosis regardless of disease distribution. We 
currently do not recommend routine surveillance for small bowel 
Crohn’s disease. Chromoendoscopy should be done in the setting 
of endoscopic remission. Th ere have been suggested methods to 
perform chromoendoscopy ( 78 ). A 2011 meta-analysis of 6 studies 
involving over 1,200 IBD patients saw a 7% incremental improvement 
in dysplasia detection yield over standard-defi nition white light colo-
noscopy ( 79 ). In a randomized controlled trial comparing white light 
high-defi nition endoscopy with dye spraying chromoendoscopy and 
electronic virtual colonoscopy in 270 IBD patients with longstanding 
ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s colitis, there was no signifi cant diff erence 
in dysplasia detection rates between the three modalities—high-defi -
nition white light colonoscopy alone was suffi  cient for detecting colo-
rectal neoplasia ( 80 ). Another randomized controlled trial (involving 
a total of 103 patients) comparing high-defi nition white light endos-
copy with chromoendoscopy in ulcerative colitis has been presented 
in a preliminary manner ( 81 ). In this case, the dysplasia detection 
rate was signifi cantly higher among the 50 patients randomized to 
chromoendoscopy (22%) compared with that of the 53 patients ran-
domized to high-defi nition white light endoscopy (9.4%) ( 81 ). A 
2017 systematic review evaluated 10 randomized trials that included 
1,500 patients to compare chromoendoscopy with other endoscopic 
techniques for dysplasia surveillance in patients with IBD ( 82 ). Chro-
moendoscopy was signifi cantly associated with a higher likelihood 
of detecting patients with dysplasia compared with other techniques 
(relative risk (RR), 1.37; 95% confi dence interval (CI), 1.04–1.79); this 
association was signifi cant only if chromoendoscopy was compared 
with standard-defi nition white-light endoscopy (RR, 2.12; 95% CI, 
1.15–3.91). When chromoendoscopy was compared with high-def-
inition white light endoscopy it was not more likely to detect dys-
plasia (RR, 1.42; 95% CI, 0.80–2.52). Chromoendoscopy required a 
signifi cantly longer procedural time compared with other techniques 
(mean diff erence, 8.91 min; 95% CI, 1.37–16.45) ( 83 ). Th ere was no 
direct evidence of eff ect on preventing all-cause/cancer-specifi c mor-
tality or time to interval cancer. At this point in time, there is not suf-
fi cient evidence to strongly recommend universal chromoendoscopy 
for IBD colorectal neoplasia surveillance if the endoscopist has access 
to high-defi nition white light endoscopy.
 Recommendations
 4 .  Narrow-band imaging should not be used during colorectal 
neoplasia surveillance examinations for Crohn’s disease (con-
ditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
may be seen in up to 30% of patients with CD, making it more chal-
lenging to diagnose with routine small bowel imaging techniques 
( 64 ). Several meta-analyses have examined the diagnostic yield 
of capsule endoscopy in the evaluation of patients with suspected 
CD. Capsule endoscopy is superior to small bowel barium studies, 
computed tomography enterography (CTE) and ileocolonoscopy 
in patients with suspected CD, with incremental yield of diagnosis 
of 32%, 47%, and 22% respectively ( 64 ). However, some studies 
have questioned the specifi city of capsule endoscopy fi ndings for 
CD, and to date there is no consensus as to exactly which capsule 
endoscopy fi ndings constitute a diagnosis of CD ( 65 ). Th e Lewis 
score is a scoring system based on the evaluation of three endo-
scopic parameters: villous appearance, ulcers, and strictures. Th e 
scoring system is incorporated into the soft ware platform of the 
some endoscopy capsules and assists in the quantifi cation of small 
bowel infl ammatory burden and diagnosis of CD ( 66 ). Capsule 
endoscopy has a high negative predictive value of 96% ( 67 ). Th e 
capsule retention rate in patients with suspected CD is 0–5.4%, and 
higher in those with known CD ( 68 ). Use of a patency capsule or 
small bowel imaging before video capsule endoscopy will reduce 
the risk of retention of the standard video capsule ( 69–71 ). Capsule 
endoscopy may identify a site for directed biopsy to obtain tissue 
to establish a diagnosis of CD.
 Deep enteroscopy is not part of routine diagnostic testing in 
patients with suspected Crohn’s disease, but may provide 
additional information in patients who require biopsy/sampling 
of small bowel tissue to make a diagnosis (Summary 
Statement). 
 Capsule endoscopy and small bowel imaging techniques lack 
the means to provide tissue when that is needed for diagnosis dur-
ing evaluation of the small bowel. Device-assisted enteroscopic 
techniques, which include single-balloon enteroscopy (Olympus, 
Tokyo, Japan) and double-balloon enteroscopy (Fujinon, Tokyo, 
Japan and NaviAid, Pentax), have been developed to allow for deep 
enteroscopic evaluation of the small bowel ( 72 ). Double-balloon 
enteroscopy studies in CD have not included large numbers of 
patients, but report a diagnostic yield as high as 80% when used in 
patients with suspected CD ( 73–76 ). Double-balloon enteroscopy 
is more sensitive in detecting lesions in patients with suspected 
CD than multiple radiographic imaging techniques ( 77 ); however, 
because of the invasive and potentially time-consuming nature of 
the study, it should be reserved for cases in which tissue is needed 
or potential therapeutic intervention such as stricture dilation is 
required ( 72 ).
 Recommendations
 2 .  In patients at particularly high risk for colorectal neoplasia 
(e.g., personal history of dysplasia, primary sclerosing chol-
angitis), chromoendoscopy should be used during colonos-
copy, as it may increase the diagnostic yield for detection of 
colorectal dysplasia, especially compared with standard-def-
inition white light endoscopy (conditional recommendation, 
low level of evidence). 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
12
 Th ere was hope that narrow-band imaging would serve as a 
virtual chromoendoscopy and increase dysplasia detection over 
white light endoscopy without the need for actual dye spraying. A 
randomized trial from Barcelona of 60 patients with longstanding 
colonic IBD compared narrow-band imaging with dye spraying 
chromoendoscopy, and there was no diff erence in dysplasia detec-
tion rates ( 84 ). Another randomized trial comparing narrow-band 
imaging with high-defi nition white light endoscopy for neoplasia 
surveillance in patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis could 
not detect a diff erence in dysplasia detection rates ( 85 ). Th us, nar-
row-band imaging cannot be recommended as a surveillance tool 
in patients with longstanding colitis.
 Recommendations
 5 .  Endoscopists who are suffi  ciently trained and comfortable 
performing chromoendoscopy may be able to forgo obtaining 
random surveillance biopsies and rely on targeted biopsies alone 
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 Multiple studies have found that the rate of dysplasia detection 
from random, nontargeted biopsies is extremely low, in the order 
of 0.1 to 0.2%, whereas the detection rate in targeted biopsies is 
considerably higher—indeed, in such comparison studies, the per-
centage of dysplastic lesions detected on targeted biopsies ranges 
from 80 to 90% ( 86–90 ). Th us, endoscopists suffi  ciently trained in 
chromoendoscopy can rely on targeted biopsies alone. Th e learn-
ing curve for performing chromoendoscopy may not be steep—in 
one recent study, there was no diff erence in dysplasia detection 
rates between expert and nonexpert endoscopists (18.5% vs. 
13.1%) ( 91 ).
 Imaging studies
 Small bowel imaging should be performed as part of the initial diag-
nostic workup for patients with suspected Crohn’s disease (Summary 
Statement). 
 Computed tomography enterography (CTE) is sensitive for the detection 
of small bowel disease in patients with Crohn’s disease and is comparable 
to magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) (Summary Statement). 
 Because of the absence of any radiation exposure, MRE should 
be used preferentially in young patients (<35 years) and in patients 
in whom it is likely that serial exams will need to be performed 
(Summary Statement). 
 Th e decision for which small bowel imaging study to use is in part 
related to the expertise of the institution and the clinical presentation 
of the patient (Summary Statement). 
 Th e small bowel is one of the most common areas aff ected by 
infl ammation in patients with CD. Much of the infl ammation is 
beyond the reach of standard endoscopic evaluation. In up to 50% 
of patients with active small bowel disease, infl ammation may skip 
the terminal ileum or be intramural and not detected by ileocolo-
noscopy ( 92 ). Complications of CD such as stricturing disease and 
enteric fi stulas are best identifi ed using small bowel imaging tech-
niques. CTE has a reported sensitivity as high as 90% in detecting 
lesions associated with CD ( 65,93 ). Th e sensitivity for detecting 
active small bowel CD in one comparison study was only 65% with 
small bowel follow-through compared with 83% with CTE ( 65 ). 
In studies comparing capsule endoscopy with small-bowel follow-
through, there have been instances of patients with a normal small 
bowel follow-through showing both mucosal disease (20%) and 
stricturing disease (6%) on a capsule endoscopy ( 94 ). CTE fea-
tures such as mucosal enhancement, mesenteric hypervascularity, 
and mesenteric fat stranding are all suggestive of active infl amma-
tion ( 95 ). MRE has similar sensitivity to CTE with wall enhance-
ment, mucosal lesions, and T2 hypersensitivity as suggestive of 
intestinal infl ammation ( 96 ). Infl ammation scoring systems have 
been developed to provide quantifi cation of the degree of infl am-
mation. Th is may allow for assessment of treatment eff ects in serial 
examinations ( 97 ). Improvement in radiologic parameters for CTE 
and MRE with medical therapy is associated with a better clinical 
outcome in terms of hospitalization, surgery, and steroid use in 
patients with small bowel CD ( 98 ). In patients with CD the need for 
sequential imaging exams is seen in young patients, patients with 
upper GI disease, patients with penetrating disease, and patients who 
require steroids, biologics, and surgery. Th e need for repeated CTE 
studies over time leads to levels of diagnostic radiation exposure 
that theoretically might signifi cantly increase cancer risk ( 99,100 ). 
In these patients MRE is preferred. Techniques to reduce dose of 
radiation exposure during diagnostic CT scanning have been imple-
mented and currently being refi ned using changes in both soft ware 
and hardware to maintain image quality with a decreased dose of 
radiation. How this will alter the use of CTE is not known ( 101 ).
 Cross-sectional imaging with MRI of the pelvis and/or endoscopic 
ultrasound may be used to further characterize perianal Crohn’s 
disease and perirectal abscesses (Summary Statement). 
 Approximately 25% of patients with CD will develop a perirec-
tal complication of their disease, including fi stula formation and/
or perirectal abscess ( 14 ). With standard medical therapy there 
is a high relapse rate of fi stulous drainage. Imaging of the peri-
anal area allows for identifi cation of disease that requires surgical 
intervention to help with healing as well identify and classify all 
of the disease that is present before and aft er medical therapy 
( 102 ). Comparison studies have shown endoscopic ultrasound to 
have greater than 90% accuracy in diagnosis of perianal fi stu-
lizing disease.( 103 ) Serial endoscopic ultrasound exams may be 
used to help guide therapeutic intervention in patients with peri-
anal Crohn’s fi stulizing disease, including seton removal and dis-
continuation of medical therapy ( 104,105 ). Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) of the pelvis has comparable accuracy ( 102,106 ).
 If an intra-abdominal abscess is suspected, cross-sectional imaging of 
the abdomen and pelvis should be performed (Summary Statement). 
 CTE and MRE both have an accuracy of >90% in the detection 
of abscesses preoperatively ( 107 ). CT can be used to help direct 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
13
B1 (nonstricturing, nonpenetrating), B2 (structuring), and B3 
(penetrating). Th e letter “p” is appended to the B subtype if there 
is the presence of perianal fi stulizing disease ( 114 ). Location tends 
to remain stable and behavior tends to progress from B1 to B2 
or B3 over the course of disease. Th e Paris classifi cation further 
divides age into smaller segments and breaks down upper GI 
disease to location above and below the ligament of Treitz ( 115 ). 
Th ese subclassifi cations appear to be most useful in the pediatric 
population.
 Monitoring disease activity
 Th e goals of therapy in IBD have historically been based on symp-
tomatic response with good control of symptoms and improved 
quality of life. We now have objective measures of infl amma-
tion that may allow tighter control of the infl ammatory process. 
Monitoring of the infl ammatory response includes fecal markers, 
serum markers, imaging studies, and endoscopic assessment. Th e 
concept of “treating to target” is using the assessment of response 
of both clinical and infl ammatory parameters to defi ne remission. 
What is not clear is whether this rigorous defi nition of remis-
sion will lead to long-term improvement of outcomes or mod-
ify the disease course. With the advances that have been made 
in the medical therapy of CD, the concept of treating to target is 
becoming more realistic but there is still a need to have long-term 
observational studies to see whether complete clinical and infl am-
matory remission is required in all patients ( 116–118 ).
 Fecal calprotectin and fecal lactoferrin measurements may have an 
adjunctive role in monitoring disease activity (Summary Statement). 
 Fecal markers may have a role in noninvasively monitoring dis-
ease activity in CD. Studies have shown that both fecal lactofer-
rin and fecal calprotectin are sensitive markers of disease activity 
and correlate with a number of the endoscopic activity indices 
such as the colonic SES-CD ( 119,120 ). Th ere have been several 
studies that suggest that levels of fecal calprotectin can be used to 
monitor patients for postoperative recurrence aft er ileocolic resec-
tion for Crohn’s disease. Levels of >100 μ g/g indicate endoscopic 
recurrence with a sensitivity in the range of 89% ( 121,122 ). In 
patients with an infl iximab-induced remission, fecal calprotectin 
of >160 μ g/g has a sensitivity of 91.7% and a specifi city of 82.9% to 
predict relapse ( 123,124 ).
 Serum CRP is relatively nonspecifi c for the infl ammation of Crohn’s 
disease, but in select patients serial measurements may have a role 
in monitoring disease activity and response to therapy (Summary 
Statement). 
 Serum CRP has been shown to have a more consistent role 
in monitoring response in patients treated with infl iximab. High 
levels at baseline (>15 mg/l) predict primary nonresponse to 
infl iximab with 67% sensitivity and 65% specifi city ( 125 ). Normali-
zation of CRP during infl iximab therapy at 14 weeks is associated 
with a greater chance of continued response or remission during 
maintenance therapy ( 126 ).
abscess drainage preoperatively that may lead to a lower rate of 
postsurgical complications ( 108 ).
 Determining disease activity and distribution
 IBD type, location, and disease activity should be documented in 
the medical record (Summary Statement). 
 Th e disease course of CD and decisions focusing on appropri-
ate immediate and future therapy are in part predicted by clini-
cal features at the time of diagnosis. Th ese features include age 
of onset, disease distribution, disease activity, and disease phe-
notype. Documentation of these features in the medical record is 
part of multiple quality initiatives in the care of patients with IBD, 
although it is not included as part of the 2015 changes in the Phy-
sician Quality Reporting System quality reporting requirements 
( 109,110 ). Documentation of disease activity at each encounter 
lends itself to the monitoring of disease progression and effi  cacy 
of therapy ( 111 ).
 Disease activity .  Clinical disease activity in CD is divided into 
remission, mild, moderate, and severe. Th ere is no “gold stand-
ard” for determining disease activity. Disease activity depends on 
heterogeneous clinical measures, impact on quality of life, com-
plications of disease, and complications of therapy. Despite the 
diffi  culty in the assessment of clinical activity, these assessments 
are important in that they allow the clinician to make decisions 
about disease management. Mild disease is characterized by pa-
tients who are ambulatory and are eating and drinking normally 
( 112 ). Th ere is <10% weight loss and there are no complications 
such as obstruction, fever, abdominal mass, or dehydration. Th ese 
patients may have diarrhea and abdominal pain and the serum 
CRP is usually increased. With mild disease there is minimal 
impact on quality-of-life indices. Th is correlates to a Crohn’s 
Disease Activity Index (CDAI) score of 150–220. Th ose patients 
with severe disease may be cachectic with signifi cant weight 
loss. Th ey may have complications such as obstruction or intra-
abdominal abscess. Symptoms persist despite aggressive therapy. 
Th ese patients are oft en hospitalized. Th is corresponds to a CDAI 
of >450. Th ose with moderate disease fi t in between the extremes. 
Of note, symptomatic disease activity is not directly correlated 
with natural history.
 Indices that are commonly used in clinical trials include the 
CDAI, the Harvey Bradshaw Index and patient-reported outcome 
tools (see  Supplementary Information online). Th is will be fur-
ther discussed in the section “Working Defi nitions of Disease 
Activity and Prognosis.”
 Phenotypic classifi cation .  Th e international standard of pheno-
typic classifi cation is currently the 2005 Montreal revision of the 
Vienna classifi cation ( 113 ). Th is classifi cation system includes age 
of onset, disease location, and disease behavior. A1 refers to dis-
ease onset at 16 years of age or younger, A2 disease onset between 
17 and 40 years of age, and A3 over 40 years. Disease location 
is divided into L1 (terminal ileum), L2 (colon), L3 (ileocolonic), 
and L4 (upper GI involvement). Disease behavior is divided into 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
14
 Periodic cross-sectional imaging (CTE, MRE) may be considered in 
monitoring response to therapy in certain patients with small bowel 
Crohn’s disease (Summary Statement). 
 MR infl ammatory scores have been developed that may allow 
for serial MRI to determine response to therapy ( 127,128 ). 
Improvement in MR infl ammatory scores correlates with clini-
cal improvement in patients treated with infl iximab ( 129 ). It has 
also been demonstrated that an improvement in MRE and CTE 
infl ammatory parameters is associated with a decrease in hospital-
izations, surgery, and steroid requirements in patients with small 
bowel CD ( 98 ). Th e ability to examine the entire bowel wall for 
changes associated with infl ammation is advantageous in popu-
lations of patients who cannot be assessed endoscopically (e.g., 
patients with primarily small intestinal involvement). Small bowel 
ultrasound has been used largely outside the United States for 
evaluation of CD. It has been used to assist in the diagnosis of CD, 
for detection of extramural complications, for the detection and 
evaluation of stenotic strictures, and for follow-up of the disease 
course.
 Mucosal healing as determined by endoscopy is a goal of therapy 
(Summary Statement). 
• 
 Endoscopic scores have been developed that are reliable in 
measuring degree of mucosal healing and may be used to 
monitor response to therapy. 
• 
 Evaluation of the ileum for postoperative endoscopic recurrence 
by colonoscopy within a year aft er ileocolonic resection may 
help guide further therapy. 
 Mucosal healing has become an important target in assessing 
effi  cacy of treatment for IBD. In patients with CD, mucosal heal-
ing is defi ned as an absence of ulceration and endoscopic scor-
ing systems have been developed to quantify degree of ulceration 
and infl ammation in patients with CD within the reach of the 
colonoscope ( 130 ). Th ere are a limited number of studies that 
have examined the long-term impact of mucosal healing on the 
clinical course of disease. In patients with early-stage CD, com-
plete mucosal healing aft er 2 years of therapy predicts sustained 
steroid-free, clinical remission 3 and 4 years out from initiation of 
treatment ( 131 ). Other clinical outcomes associated with mucosal 
healing in CD have been decreased surgery and hospitalizations 
( 132 ). Th e SES-CD ( 57 ) scoring system has been used prospec-
tively to assess mucosal healing in patients treated with anti-tumor 
necrosis factor (anti-TNF) therapy as well as with anti-TNF/thio-
purines combination therapy, demonstrating that changes can 
be measured; furthermore, there is a strong correlation between 
improvement in the SES-CD (mucosal) healing and clinical remis-
sion ( 133,134 ). In the patient who has undergone an ileocolonic 
resection, assessment of endoscopic lesions just proximal to the 
anastomosis appears to identify patients who are likely to have a 
clinical recurrence of CD ( 135 ). Th is endoscopic activity score is 
known as the Rutgeerts’ score and has become widely used in the 
assessment of postoperative patients ( 136 ) ( Supplementary Infor-
mation online).
 Disease modiﬁ ers
 Recommendations
 6 .  Nonsteroidal anti-infl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may exac-
erbate disease activity and should be avoided when possible 
in patients with Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, 
low level of evidence). 
 Th ere are numerous case reports and observational studies that 
suggest that use of NSAIDs in patients with CD are associated with 
IBD fl ares. NSAIDs have been documented to damage the mucosa 
of the small intestine distal to the duodenum with ulcerations, ero-
sions, and webs. Mucosal permeability is increased with NSAID 
therapy leading to increased exposure to luminal toxins and anti-
gens ( 137 ). In a comparison study of acetaminophen, naproxen, 
nabumetone, nimesulide, and aspirin, there was a 17–28% relapse 
rate of quiescent IBD within 9 days of therapy with the nonselec-
tive NSAIDS (naproxen and nabumetone) ( 138 ). Recent NSAID 
use has been associated with an increased risk of emergency 
admission to the hospital for patients with IBD ( 139,140 ). Th ere 
have been other studies that have not found this association ( 141 ). 
Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in short-term therapy have 
not been shown to exacerbate ulcerative colitis, but similar studies 
have not been performed in CD ( 142 ).
 Recommendations
 7 .  Cigarette smoking exacerbates disease activity and accelerates 
disease recurrence and should be avoided. Active smoking 
cessation programs should be encouraged (strong recommen-
dation, low level of evidence). 
 Cigarette smoking has been shown in multiple clinical situations 
to have an adverse eff ect on disease activity in CD. Th ere is an 
increased rate of surgical intervention, incidence of IBD hospitali-
zations, and peripheral arthritis in patients with CD who smoke as 
compared with those who do not smoke ( 143,144 ). Active smok-
ing has been associated with a penetrating phenotype in CD ( 145 ). 
Active smoking increases the risk of relapse aft er discontinuation 
of anti-TNF therapy ( 146 ). Patients with CD who stop smoking 
have decreased fl ares in disease activity and a decreased need for 
steroids and immunomodulatory therapy ( 147 ).
 Recommendations
 8 .  Usage of antibiotics should not be restricted in Crohn’s dis-
ease patients in order to prevent disease fl ares (Conditional 
recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 Th e intestinal microbiome is thought to play a role in the patho-
genesis of IBD. Disruption of the intestinal microbiota or dysbiosis 
may be detrimental in terms of stimulation of the immune system 
in patients with IBD. It has been shown that dysbiosis is associated 
with increased intestinal infl ammation ( 148 ). Antibiotic eff ects 
on the gut oft en lead to symptoms that are indistinguishable from 
IBD, including diarrhea and abdominal cramping ( 137 ). In a large 
case–crossover study using the General Practice Research Data-
base from 1989 to 1997, exposure to antibiotics within 60 days was 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
15
cation dose adjusted in order to attempt to optimize therapy, or 
advance to treatment for moderate to severe disease according to 
their clinical status.
 In patients who have active symptoms, despite treatment with 
a biologic (such as an anti-TNF) it is appropriate to evaluate 
whether their symptoms result from the presence of active CD 
with the evaluation of the mucosa with cross-sectional imag-
ing (CTE or MRE) or endoscopy (e.g., colonoscopy). Th e pres-
ence of biomarkers of disease activity can be assessed (such as 
CRP, fecal calprotectin) but should not exclusively serve as end 
point for treatment as normalization of the biomarker can occur 
despite having active mucosal infl ammation/ulceration. Th e 
presence of mimickers of active IBD such as  C. diffi  cile infec-
tions, cytomegalovirus infection, and enteric pathogens should 
be evaluated.
 Th erapeutic drug monitoring has become very common in the 
management of CD ( 159 ), especially among patients who initially 
responded to biologic therapy but then developed loss of clinical 
response, and this approach has been endorsed by several national 
and international groups ( 160–162 ). A detailed critical examina-
tion of the role of therapeutic drug monitoring was beyond the 
scope of this guideline. If active CD is documented, then assess-
ment of biologic drug levels and antidrug antibodies (therapeutic 
drug monitoring) should be considered. Th ere can be three dif-
ferent scenarios explaining biologic failure: mechanistic failure, 
immune-mediated drug failure, and fi nally non-immune-mediated 
drug failure. Individuals who have therapeutic drug levels and no 
antibodies with the presence of active mucosal ulceration are con-
sidered to have mechanistic failure and a medication with another 
class should be considered (e.g., in a patient on anti-TNF therapy 
with active infl ammation, consideration of anti-IL12/23 therapy or 
anti-integrin therapy). Non-immune-mediated pharmacokinetic 
mechanisms occur when patients have subtherapeutic trough con-
centrations and absent antidrug antibodies. Th is scenario is a con-
sequence of rapid drug clearance, classically in the setting of a high 
infl ammatory burden. Immune-mediated drug failure is seen in 
patients who have low or undetectable trough concentrations and 
high titers of antidrug antibodies. A recent guideline has suggested 
minimal “therapeutic” target trough levels; infl iximab  > 7.5 μ g/ml, 
adalimumab  > 5 μ g/ml, and certolizumab pegol  > 20 μ g/ml ( 161 ).
 Th e following sections review the specifi c data and recom-
mendations for the treatment of luminal infl ammatory CD. Th e 
section focusing on fi stulizing CD will follow this section. Th e 
anatomic distribution and disease activity are the factors to be 
considered when determining appropriate medical therapy for 
individual patients with CD. Th e anatomic distribution of disease 
is important only for medications with targeted delivery systems, 
such as sulfasalazine, mesalamine, and enteric-coated budeson-
ide, or where the target for the mechanism of action may be local-
ized, such as greater luminal bacterial concentrations in the colon 
for antibiotics. For all other agents (parenteral or oral corticos-
teroids, mercaptopurine, azathioprine, methotrexate, infl iximab, 
adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, natalizumab, ustekinumab, 
vedolizumab, cyclosporine A, or tacrolimus), therapeutic activity 
against CD is believed to occur throughout the entire GI tract.
associated with a reduced risk of a fl are ( 149 ). Gut dysbiosis related 
to antibiotics is associated with  C. diffi  cile infection. Patients with 
IBD have a higher carriage rate of toxigenic  C. diffi  cile as compared 
with controls ( 150,151 ). In patients who have an increase in symp-
toms of diarrhea aft er antibiotic therapy, concurrent  C. diffi  cile 
infection should be considered and evaluated.
 Recommendations
 9 .  Perceived stress, depression, and anxiety, which are common 
in IBD, are factors that lead to decreased health-related quality 
of life in patients with Crohn’s disease, and lead to lower adher-
ence to provider recommendations. Assessment and manage-
ment of stress, depression, and anxiety should be included as 
part of the comprehensive care of the Crohn’s disease patient 
(strong recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 Many patients associate stress leading to an increase in symptoms 
of IBD. Th ere appears to be an association between depression and 
fl ares in CD activity ( 152 ). Th e somatic symptoms that develop 
in relationship to depression can cause signifi cant disability. Per-
ceived stress includes issues related to control, disease manage-
ment, and impact on lifestyle and has a strong relationship to IBD 
symptoms in multiple studies ( 137,153,154 ). Th e increased bowel 
symptoms are not always associated with increased infl ammation, 
but may nevertheless contribute to decreased health-related qual-
ity of life ( 154–156 ). CD patients with major depression and anxi-
ety have a greater risk of surgery and a higher degree of health-care 
utilization than without these comorbidities ( 157 ). Children with 
depression and CD have been shown to have decreased sympto-
matic disease activity when treated with cognitive behavioral ther-
apy as compared with supportive listening ( 158 ).
 MANAGEMENT OF DISEASE
 General principles
 Th erapeutic recommendations for patients with CD are estab-
lished based upon disease location, disease severity, disease-
associated complications, and future disease prognosis. Th erapeu-
tic approaches are individualized according to the symptomatic 
response and tolerance to medical intervention. Current thera-
peutic approaches should be considered a sequential continuum 
to treat “acute disease” or “induce clinical remission,” and then 
to “maintain response/remission.” Treatment for active disease 
should be continued to the point of symptomatic remission or 
failure to continue improvement. Objective evaluation by endo-
scopic or cross-sectional imaging should be undertaken to sub-
stantiate the subjective improvement of symptoms. Th e patients’ 
response to initial therapy should be evaluated within several 
weeks, whereas adverse events should be monitored closely 
throughout the period of therapy. In general, clinical evidence 
of improvement should be evident within 2–4 weeks and the 
maximal improvement should occur with 12–16 weeks. Patients 
achieving remission should be considered for maintenance ther-
apy. Th ose with continued symptoms should be treated with an 
alternative therapy for mild to moderate disease, have their medi-
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
16
 Working deﬁ nitions of disease activity and prognosis
 Since the previous editions of these Practice Guidelines, the work-
ing defi nitions of CD activity have changed and evolved. Th ese 
end points are consistent with the European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organization’s (ECCO) grading of disease activity ( 163 ). Indi-
viduals are oft en classifi ed based upon their prognosis and their 
disease activity. Th e disease activity comprises a combination of 
symptoms and endoscopic fi ndings, whereas the prognosis is a 
compilation of factors predictive of a benign or a more virulent 
course of disease (mandating surgery and/and resulting in dis-
ease-related disability).
 Although the majority of clinical trials have utilized CDAI to 
assess therapeutic outcomes, a more “clinical” working defi nition 
for CD activity is valuable for the practicing physician. Th is ena-
bles clinicians to guide therapy in an appropriate manner. It should 
be stressed that there may be various end points to consider when 
defi ning remission.
 An individual may be in histologic remission, endoscopic remis-
sion, clinical remission, or surgical remission. An individual is in 
symptomatic remission (usually corresponding to a CDAI score 
<150) when that patient is asymptomatic or without any sympto-
matic infl ammatory sequelae. Individuals included in this category 
may have responded to medical therapy or surgical therapy (such 
as ileocolonic resection) and have no residual active disease ( 164 ). 
Individuals who require the use of conventional corticosteroids to 
achieve clinical well-being are said to be “steroid dependent” and 
are not considered to be in remission. Th is statement is based on 
the potential for adverse events to accrue in patients on conven-
tional corticosteroids.
 Individuals with mild–moderate disease (usually corresponding 
to a CDAI score 150–220) are ambulatory and able to tolerate oral 
alimentation without manifestations of dehydration, systemic tox-
icity (high fevers, rigors, and prostration), abdominal tenderness, 
painful mass, intestinal obstruction, or >10% weight loss. Th ese 
individuals do not have severe endoscopic lesions.
 Severe endoscopic lesions have been defi ned in several diff erent 
manners. Th ere are several scoring systems that assess ulcer size, depth, 
and distribution including the SES-CD ( 57 ) (very large ulcers >2 cm) 
and the CDEIS ( 56 ) (deep vs. shallow) ( Supplementary Information 
online). Allez et al. ( 165 ) described the severe endoscopic lesion group 
as patients with large confl uent and deep ulcers that occupy >10% of 
the surface area of at least 1 segment of the colon.
 Th e SES-CD has been helpful to translate endoscopic activity 
into clinically meaningful fi ndings that are easy to understand for 
the clinician. It has been proposed that for SES-CD, remission is 
0–2, mild is 3–6, moderate is 7–15, and severe is  > 16. Translat-
ing these fi ndings into descriptive terms: mild endoscopic activity 
would consist of altered vascular pattern and erythema or edema. 
Moderate endoscopic activity would consist of erosions or super-
fi cial ulcers taking up >10% but less than 30% of the surface area, 
and severe disease as large ulcers >2 cm ( 57,166 ).
 Individuals who are considered to have moderate–severe disease 
(usually corresponding to a CDAI score 220–450) are considered 
to have failed to respond to treatment for mild–moderate disease, 
or those with more prominent symptoms of fever, signifi cant 
weight loss, abdominal pain or tenderness, intermittent nausea 
or vomiting (without obstructive fi ndings), or signifi cant ane-
mia. Th ey typically have moderate to severely active endoscopic 
mucosal disease.
 Finally, those individuals who are considered to have severe/
fulminant disease (symptomatically usually corresponding to a 
CDAI score >450) are patients with persistent symptoms despite 
the introduction of conventional corticosteroids or biologic agents 
as outpatients, or individuals presenting with high fevers, persis-
tent vomiting, evidence of intestinal obstruction, signifi cant peri-
toneal signs such as involuntary guarding or rebound tenderness, 
cachexia, or evidence of an abscess. Th ey have endoscopic or radi-
ographic evidence of severe mucosal disease.
 Recently, there has been a move by regulators to require patient-
reported outcomes for regulatory approval of new therapeutic 
agents for the treatment of patients with CD. Th e primary end point 
is to measure an end point that “matters” to patients. Th e Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) is moving away from the use of the 
CDAI to focus on patient-reported outcomes and separately, objec-
tive measures of disease, such as fi ndings on endoscopy ( 167,168 ).
 Symptom assessment
 Individual patients with other conditions may have symptoms 
indistinguishable from those of patients with active luminal CD. A 
search should be attempted as a general rule to ascertain whether 
a patient has symptoms from their CD or other conditions, such 
as bile salt diarrhea, intestinal infection (e.g.,  Salmonella, Shi-
gella ,  Campylobacter , and  C. diffi  cile ), small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth (especially if these have had an ileocolonic resection 
or have known intestinal strictures), bypass from a fi stula (such 
as a gastrocolic fi stula), lactose intolerance, irritable bowel syn-
drome, anorectal sphincter dysfunction, food intolerance, intes-
tinal obstruction or a stricture, accentuated gastrocolic refl ex, a 
medication-related adverse event (such as diarrhea from an ami-
nosalicylates), or other conditions. Although not specifi c for CD 
activity, determination of serum CRP and/or fecal calprotectin 
is suggested as a useful laboratory correlate with disease activity 
assessed by the CDAI ( 169 ). In addition, it is advocated to assess 
disease activity by use of cross-sectional imaging with CTE or 
MRE. In individuals without any observable mucosal infl amma-
tion or ulceration, consideration should be given to the aforemen-
tioned potential diff erential diagnostic possibilities. However, it is 
not necessary to have the complete absence of mucosal infl amma-
tion to entertain alternative explanations for specifi c symptoms or 
signs; there may be several coexisting conditions.
 MEDICAL THERAPY
 Th e forthcoming sections review the specifi c data and recommen-
dations for the treatment of luminal infl ammatory CD. In order 
to eff ectively treat luminal CD, the anatomic distribution and dis-
ease activity are important factors to be considered. Th e specifi c 
medical therapy selected is based on the location, extent, pheno-
type, and severity of disease. Th e anatomic distribution of disease 
is important only for medications with targeted delivery systems.
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
17
 General approaches
 Medical treatment of CD is usually divided into induction and 
maintenance therapy. Th ese phases of treatment involve achiev-
ing control of infl ammation relatively quickly (over 3 months or 
less) and then sustaining that control for prolonged periods of 
time (beyond 3 months). Treatment is generally chosen accord-
ing to the patient’s risk profi le and disease severity, with a goal 
of controlling infl ammation and, consequently, symptoms arising 
from active infl ammation. It is important to acknowledge, how-
ever, that few clinical trials in CD have incorporated objective 
outcomes such as endoscopic mucosal healing as a primary out-
come. Even the most eff ective available therapies fail to achieve 
such hard outcomes in the majority of patients enrolled in clini-
cal trials. Another goal is to prevent the occurrence of disease 
complications, such as stricture and fi stula. Medical therapy may 
also address some aspects of fi stulas in CD; however, little evi-
dence suggests that strictures arising in CD may be treated eff ec-
tively with medications alone. Medical therapy used to treat CD 
includes the categories of 5-aminosalicylates (5-ASA), antibiotics, 
corticosteroids, immunomodulators, and biologics (the anti-TNF 
agents infl iximab, adalimumab, certolizumab pegol; agents tar-
geting leukocyte traffi  cking, including vedolizumab, natalizumab; 
and the anti-p40 (anti-IL-12/23) antibody, ustekinumab).
 Mild-to-moderately severe disease/low-risk disease
 Recommendations
 10 .  Sulfasalazine is eff ective for treating symptoms of colonic 
Crohn’s disease that is mild to moderately active and can 
be used as treatment for this patient population ( 170 – 174 ) 
 (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 11 .  Oral mesalamine has not consistently been demonstrated to 
be eff ective compared with placebo for induction of remis-
sion and achieving mucosal healing in patients with active 
Crohn’s disease and should not be used to treat patients with 
active Crohn’s disease (strong recommendation, moderate 
level of evidence). 
 12 .  Controlled ileal release budesonide at a dose of 9 mg once daily 
is eff ective and should be used for induction of symptomatic 
remission for patients with mild-to-moderate ileocecal Crohn’s 
disease (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 13 .  Metronidazole is not more eff ective than placebo as therapy 
for luminal infl ammatory Crohn’s disease and should not be 
used as primary therapy (conditional recommendation, low 
level of evidence). 
 14 .  Ciprofl oxacin has shown similar effi  cacy to mesalamine in 
active luminal Crohn’s disease but has not been shown to be 
more eff ective than placebo to induce remission in Crohn’s 
disease and should not be used as therapy for luminal infl am-
matory Crohn’s disease (conditional recommendation, very 
low level of evidence). 
 15 .  Antimycobacterial therapy has not been shown to be eff ective 
for induction or for maintenance of remission or mucosal 
healing in patients with Crohn’s disease and should not be 
used as primary therapy (conditional recommendation, low 
level of evidence). 
 16 .  For patients with low risk of progression, treatment of symp-
toms with anti-diarrheals, other nonspecifi c medications, 
and dietary manipulation, along with careful observation 
for inadequate symptom relief, worsening infl ammation, or 
disease progression, is acceptable ( 175 )  (strong recommenda-
tion, low level of evidence). 
 When treating patients with CD, the agents chosen to treat the 
disease are chosen based upon the patient’s clinical presentation 
and prognosis; that is, the risk of progression of their disease 
(see “Natural History” section). Disease-related complications 
include the development of stricturing or penetrating complica-
tions in patients with CD. Th ere is a subgroup of patients who 
rapidly progress to complicated disease behaviors, with strictur-
ing and possible bowel obstruction or internal penetrating fi s-
tulas, or both, oft en resulting in intra-abdominal sepsis. Th ese 
individuals are in the high-risk group. Risk factors for progres-
sion include young age at the time of diagnosis, ileal disease loca-
tion, serological response to specifi c microbial antigens, initial 
extensive bowel involvement, perianal/severe rectal disease, and 
presence of a penetrating or stenosis disease phenotype at diag-
nosis ( 12,176 ).
 Treating the patient with disease on the milder spectrum pre-
sents a conundrum. On the one hand, agents proven to be eff ec-
tive in patients with moderate-to-severe disease, such as anti-TNF 
agents, are undoubtedly eff ective in mild disease as well, even if 
such patients were not explicitly studied in randomized controlled 
trials. On the other hand, the risk of adverse eff ects and high cost 
of such agents may not be justifi able in a low-risk population. 
Unfortunately, few agents studied in milder disease populations 
have proven to be eff ective. Th e desire to avoid overtreating disease 
and exposing the mild patient to unnecessary risk has led to the 
widespread utilization of largely ineff ective agents whose use can-
not be justifi ed by clinical evidence. For example, 5-ASAs remain 
widely prescribed for the treatment of CD, despite evidence dem-
onstrating their lack of effi  cacy.
 Mesalamine .  5-ASA acts as a topical anti-infl ammatory agent that 
has effi  cacy within the lumen of the intestine. Although its use 
in ulcerative colitis is well established and based upon evidence-
based criteria, its use in CD is not well established. Oral mesala-
mine has not been consistently been demonstrated to be eff ective 
compared with placebo for induction of remission and achieving 
mucosal healing in patients with active CD ( 177–179 ). Sulfasala-
zine is formulated as combination of a sulfapyridine with 5-ASA; 
5-ASA is responsible for the anti-infl ammatory property of this 
drug, whereas sulfapyridine is the carrier that allows 5-ASA to 
be delivered into the colon. Sulfasalazine (in the doses of 3–6 g 
daily) is an eff ective therapy for treatment of symptoms of patients 
with mild to moderately active colonic CD and/or ileocolonic CD, 
but not in those with isolated small bowel disease. Sulfasalazine 
has not been demonstrated to be more eff ective than placebo for 
achieving mucosal healing in patients with CD ( 180–182 ). For 
rectal and sigmoid disease, 5-ASA suppository and enema prepa-
rations are eff ective for induction and maintenance of remission 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
18
be of benefi t for mild-to-moderate CD ( 190 ) (see Maintenance 
section for a detailed description).
 Th e relationship of mycobacterial disease to the development of 
CD has been extensively evaluated. Th e absence of mycobacteria 
in all tissue examined (even when assessed by PCR) and the lack 
of signifi cant patient disease benefi t when treated with multidrug 
regimens has led to the recommendation that antimycobacte-
rial therapy should not be used to treat patients with active CD. 
Antimycobacterial therapy has not been shown to be eff ective for 
induction or for maintenance of remission or mucosal healing in 
patients with CD ( 191,192 ).
 Diet .  Some studies suggest that dietary therapies, including el-
emental, semielemental, and defi ned diets, may be eff ective in 
some patients with CD, including reduction of objective indica-
tors of mucosal infl ammation. Th ese benefi ts, however, are not 
durable, with symptoms and active infl ammation reoccurring 
upon resumption of an unrestricted diet. Th erefore, dietary thera-
pies may be considered as an adjunct to other therapies in induc-
tion therapy ( 193 ). Patients deemed to be at low risk for progres-
sion of disease may be treated with nonspecifi c therapies directed 
at symptoms, but must be followed carefully for signs of disease 
worsening or progression.
 Provided that the goal of treatment is the normalization, or at 
least substantial improvement, of objective indicators of mucosal 
infl ammation, providers can avoid the pitfall of inadequate disease 
treatment that, over time, will culminate in progression of 
disease and the occurrence of important complications even 
if they choose expectant observation and treatment directed to 
alleviating symptoms.
 Moderate-to-severe disease/moderate-to-high-risk disease
 Corticosteroids 
 Recommendations
 17 .  Oral corticosteroids are eff ective and can be used for short-
term use in alleviating signs and symptoms of moderate to 
severely active Crohn’s disease ( 194 )  (strong recommenda-
tion, moderate level of evidence). 
 18 .  Conventional corticosteroids do not consistently achieve 
mucosal healing and should be used sparingly (weak recom-
mendation, low level of evidence). 
 Systemic corticosteroids are ineff ective for maintenance therapy in 
patients with CD. Topical corticosteroids, although commonly used 
in CD, are of limited benefi t (Summary Statement). 
 Patients experiencing moderate-to-severe symptoms, or who 
have features of moderate to high risk of progression and com-
plication, require treatment with more eff ective agents. Con-
ventional corticosteroid treatment, such as prednisone and 
methylprednisolone given orally or, for more severe disease, 
intravenous corticosteroids are eff ective in alleviating signs 
and symptoms of a fl are. However, even short-term use may be 
accompanied by important adverse events, such as bone loss, 
mood disorder, insomnia, hypertension, elevated blood glucose, 
in patients with ulcerative colitis; however, the role of topical me-
salamine in CD, although commonly used, is of limited benefi t.
 Corticosteroids .  Corticosteroids are used primarily for the treat-
ment of fl ares of CD. Conventional corticosteroids are eff ective 
for reducing the signs and symptoms of active CD and induc-
tion of remission in patients with moderately to severely active 
CD. Oral formulations may be used for mild to moderate disease, 
whereas systemic corticosteroids are used for moderate to severe 
disease. Conventional corticosteroids are not consistently eff ec-
tive to enable patients to achieve mucosal healing. Th ey have his-
torically been used as a “bridge” to permit symptom control until 
immunomodulators and/or biologic agents become eff ective and 
enable mucosal healing.
 Although not as eff ective as conventional oral corticosteroids 
such as prednisone, controlled ileal release (CIR) budesonide 
may be eff ective for short-term relief of symptoms of mild-to-
moderate CD in patients whose disease is confi ned to the termi-
nal ileum and right colon. CIR budesonide is a pH-dependent 
ileal release oral corticosteroid formulation with high topical 
activity and low systemic bioavailability (∼ 10–20%). CIR bude-
sonide has been demonstrated to be eff ective in randomized 
placebo controlled trials for treatment of active mild-to-mod-
erate ileocecal CD ( 183,184 ). Th e lesser effi  cacy of CIR bude-
sonide is balanced against the agent’s release profi le, limited to 
the ileum and right colon, and its topical activity with extensive 
fi rst-pass eff ect, minimizing systemic exposure to corticoster-
oid eff ects.
 Antimicrobial therapy .  In patients with CD it is hypothesized that 
the development of chronic intestinal infl ammation is caused by 
an abnormal immune response to normal fl ora in genetically sus-
ceptible hosts. Th e involvement of bacteria in CD infl ammation 
has provided the rationale for including antibiotics in the thera-
peutic armamentarium. Th e precise mechanisms whereby broad-
spectrum antibiotics are benefi cial in the treatment of a subset 
of CD patients are uncertain. Several proposed mechanisms of 
effi  cacy include direct immunosuppression (e.g., metronidazole), 
elimination of bacterial overgrowth, and abolishment of a bacteri-
ally mediated antigenic trigger.
 Although widely used in the past, the primary role of antibiot-
ics for the treatment of luminal CD is not established. Metronida-
zole is not more eff ective than placebo at inducing remission in 
patients with CD ( 185,186 ). Ciprofl oxacin has shown similar effi  -
cacy to mesalamine in active CD, but has not been shown to be 
more eff ective than placebo to induce remission in CD. Neither of 
these agents has been shown to heal the mucosa in patients with 
active luminal CD ( 186–189 ). Broad-spectrum antibiotics are used 
for the treatment of pyogenic complications (e.g., intra-abdominal 
and mesenteric abscesses) in patients with CD.
 Metronidazole may be helpful to prevent postoperative recur-
rence in CD. Its effi  cacy is increased over placebo when used in 
combination with azathioprine. Ornidazole has been more help-
ful than placebo to prevent postsurgical recurrence of clinical and 
endoscopic CD. In addition, a novel enteric form of rifaximin may 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
19
narrow angle glaucoma, acne, weight gain, hypoadrenalism, 
and other important consequences. Th e appropriate prednisone 
equivalent doses used to treat patients with active CD are at doses 
ranging from 40 to 60 mg/day ( 195,196 ). Higher doses, such as 
1 mg/kg body weight per day of prednisolone, have also been 
studied. Th ese doses are typically maintained for 1–2 weeks and 
tapered at 5 mg weekly until 20 mg and then 2.5–5.0 mg weekly. 
Corticosteroid tapers should generally not exceed 3 months. 
Oral prednisone doses or equivalent doses in other oral steroids 
exceeding 60 mg a day are not recommended. Th ere have been 
no adequately powered comparative trials between diff erent 
steroid-tapering regimens in the treatment of patients with CD. 
Despite their effi  cacy in reducing signs and symptoms of active 
CD, nearly 1 in 5 patients will prove to be steroid refractory, and 
an additional one-third will become steroid dependent, unable 
to taper without subsequent recrudescence of symptoms. Th ese 
limitations may be the result of unreliable effi  cacy in healing of 
the mucosa, even among those who experience symptomatic 
relief. In addition, corticosteroids are implicated in the develop-
ment of perforating complications (abscess and fi stula) and are 
relatively contraindicated in those patients with such manifesta-
tions. For all these reasons, corticosteroids should be used spar-
ingly in CD. Once begun, care should be taken to ensure that 
corticosteroids are successfully discontinued, and steroid-spar-
ing agents should be used.
 Immunomodulators 
 Recommendations
 19 .  Azathioprine (at doses of 1.5–2.5 mg/kg/day) and 6-mer-
captopurine (at doses of 0.75–1.5 mg/kg day) are not more 
eff ective than placebo to induce short-term symptomatic 
remission and should not be used in this manner (strong 
recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 20 .  Th iopurines (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine) are eff ec-
tive and should be considered for use for steroid-sparing in 
Crohn’s disease ( 197,198 )  (Strong recommendation, low level 
of evidence). 
 21 .  Azathioprine and 6-mercaptourine are eff ective therapies and 
should be considered for treatment of patients with Crohn’s 
disease for maintenance of remission (strong recommenda-
tion, moderate level of evidence). 
 22 .  Th iopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) testing should be 
considered before initial use of azathioprine or 6-mercap-
topurine to treat patients with Crohn’s disease (strong recom-
mendation, low level of evidence). 
 23 .  Methotrexate (up to 25 mg once weekly IM or SC) is eff ective 
and should be considered for use in alleviating signs and 
symptoms in patients with steroid-dependent Crohn’s disease 
and for maintaining remission ( 199,200 )  (conditional recom-
mendation, low level of evidence). 
 Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, or methotrexate (15 mg once 
weekly) may be used in treatment of active CD and as adjunctive 
therapy for reducing immunogenicity against biologic therapy (Sum-
mary Statement). 
 In patients with moderate-to-severe CD who remain sympto-
matic despite current or prior corticosteroid therapy, the thiopurine 
analogs (6-mercaptopurine and azathioprine) may be used. Mer-
captopurine, and its prodrug, azathioprine, are eff ective steroid-
sparing agents in CD. Methotrexate, when given subcutaneously 
(SC) or intramuscularly (IM), is also eff ective as a steroid-sparing 
agent, but when prescribed to women with child-bearing capabil-
ity, should be administered only if highly eff ective contraception 
is in place. Additionally, men should be counseled to avoid con-
ceiving during use of and within 3 months of stopping methotrex-
ate because of concerns about on eff ects on spermatogenesis and 
teratogenicity ( 201 ). Th iopurine agents and methotrexate are not 
eff ective agents for short-term induction in active, symptomatic 
disease because of their relatively slow onset of action, between 8 
and 12 weeks. Th e use of methotrexate in combination with ster-
oids is eff ective for treatment of moderately active steroid-depend-
ent/resistant CD ( 202–204 ). Azathioprine (at maximal doses of 
1.5–2.5 mg/kg/day), 6-mercaptopurine (at maximal doses of 0.75–
1.5 mg/kg day), or methotrexate (15–25 mg SC/IM once weekly) 
may be used in treatment of active CD ( 198,205,206 ). Th ese agents 
can be used as adjunctive therapy for reducing immunogenicity 
against biologic therapy (6-mercaptupurine or azathioprine typi-
cally at reduced doses and methotrexate 12.5–15 mg orally once 
weekly) ( 207,208 ).
 A disadvantage of the thiopurine analogs and methotrexate is 
the slow time to clinical response that may not be evident for as 
long as 12 weeks. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine are not 
more eff ective than placebo to induce remission; they are, how-
ever, eff ective therapies for maintenance of remission in patients 
with CD. TPMT testing should be considered before initial use 
of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine to treat patients with CD 
( 209,210 ).
 Th e adverse eff ects of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine 
include allergic reactions, pancreatitis, myelosuppression, nausea, 
infections, hepatotoxicity, and malignancy, especially nonmela-
noma skin cancer and lymphoma ( 211,212 ). Methotrexate has 
similar adverse eff ects including nausea and vomiting, hepatotox-
icity, pulmonary toxicity, bone marrow suppression and skin can-
cer, and likely lymphoma; however, an escalated risk of lymphoma 
has not been conclusively demonstrated in patients with CD. Th e 
white blood cell count and liver chemistries should be routinely 
monitored during their use.
 Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil therapy 
have not been shown to be eff ective for treatment of active luminal 
CD ( 213–215 ).
 Anti-TNF agents 
 Recommendations
 24 .  Anti-TNF agents (infl iximab, adalimumab, certolizumab 
pegol) should be used to treat Crohn’s disease that is resistant 
to treatment with corticosteroids ( 216–220 )  (strong recom-
mendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 25 .  Anti-TNF agents should be given for Crohn’s disease refrac-
tory to thiopurines or methotrexate ( 216–220 )  (strong 
recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
20
 26 .  Combination therapy of infl iximab with immunomodulators 
(thiopurines) is more eff ective than treatment with either 
immunomodulators alone or infl iximab alone in patients 
who are naive to those agents ( 221 )  (strong recommendation, 
high level of evidence) 
 Th e anti-TNF antibodies (infl iximab, adalimumab, and certoli-
zumab pegol) are eff ective for treatment of patients with CD who 
respond inadequately to treatment with corticosteroids, thiopu-
rines, and methotrexate. In addition, combination therapy of infl ix-
imab with immunomodulators is more eff ective than either agent 
given alone in patients with no prior exposure to either treatment, 
suggesting an important synergistic eff ect. Combination therapy 
of adalimumab or certolizumab pegol with an immunomodulator 
has not been well studied, but is likely to be superior in effi  cacy to 
therapy with the anti-TNF agent alone, given the immunogenicity 
of all biologics, and the ability of immunomodulators to reduce the 
rate of anti-drug antibody formation. Direct evidence supporting 
the continuation of an immunomodulator (relating to augmented 
effi  cacy) when an anti-TNF antibody is begun aft er failure of the 
immunomodulator is lacking. Continuing combination therapy in 
that situation may be considered when it is important to prevent 
anti-drug antibody formation because of signifi cant disease.
 Monoclonal antibody therapy directed against TNF-α has been 
shown to be more eff ective than placebo for induction of response, 
remission, and complete and partial mucosal healing in patients 
with CD ( 222,223 ). Th ese agents are rapid in onset of eff ect, with 
benefi t oft en noted within 2 weeks of initiating therapy. Treatment 
with anti-TNF agents appears to be more eff ective when given ear-
lier in the course of disease; rates of response and remission are 
higher if given within 2 years of onset of disease. Anti-TNF-α ther-
apies include infl iximab (Remicade), a chimeric mouse-human 
IgG1 monoclonal antibody that is approved to treat moderate-to-
severe CD and fi stulizing CD that have failed to respond to con-
ventional therapy. Adalimumab (Humira) and certolizumab pegol 
(Cimzia) have been approved to treat moderate-to-severe CD that 
has failed to respond to conventional therapy. Th ese biologic agents 
are eff ective for treating patients with CD who have objective evi-
dence of active disease treated with steroids, steroid dependent or 
refractory to corticosteroids when used alone or in combination 
with thiopurines (azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine) or metho-
trexate. Certolizumab pegol is a PEGylated Fab fragment to TNF-
α and adalimumab is a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody 
directed against TNF-α ; both of these agents are self-administered 
SC. Combination therapy with infl iximab and azathioprine is more 
eff ective than monotherapy with either azathioprine or infl iximab 
alone for achieving response, remission, steroid-free remission, 
and mucosal healing ( 221 ). Combination therapy is the preferred 
strategy of treatment for patients with CD who do not have risk 
factors precluding its use.
 Anti-TNF therapy has also been shown to lessen postoperative 
endoscopic recurrence. Before anti-TNF therapy is considered for 
use in patients with CD, risk vs. benefi t needs to be assessed in 
each individual patient, given the potential risk for infection and 
malignancy with their use.
 Before initiation of anti-TNF therapy, assessment for latent 
and active tuberculosis and other latent opportunistic infections 
such as histoplasmosis and blastomycosis when potentially pre-
sent should be initiated (including evaluation of history of epide-
miological risk factors, physical examination, chest radiography, 
tuberculin skin tests, and interferon-γ release assays). Interferon-γ 
release assays are likely to complement the tuberculin skin test 
and are preferred in patients who are Bacillus Calmette-Guerin 
(BCG) vaccinated, if available. Similar testing and therapy should 
also be considered before corticosteroids or other immunomodu-
lators in patients at high risk of tuberculosis. If latent tuberculosis 
is detected, initiation of chemoprophylaxis with anti-tuberculous 
therapy should be initiated for several weeks or months before 
administration of anti-TNF therapy. It may be appropriate to con-
sider a second tuberculin skin test in an immunocompromised 
host aft er the initial test is negative. Th is is classically done 1 to 3 
weeks later ( 224 ).
 Assessment for the presence of viral hepatitis (hepatitis B sur-
face antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody and hepatitis B core 
antibody) should be performed in all CD patients before the initia-
tion of anti-TNF therapy. If a patient is seronegative for hepatitis 
B, vaccination (using a recombinant vaccine) should be initiated, 
ideally before the introduction of biologic therapy. Assessment of 
serologic response is advocated aft er vaccination. Before and dur-
ing treatment with biologic and/or immunomodulator therapy, 
patients who are HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen)-positive car-
riers should receive treatment with antiviral agents (nucleoside/
nucleotide analogs) in order to avoid hepatitis B fl are and liver 
failure.
 Other appropriate vaccinations (pneumococcal polysaccharide 
vaccine (including PSV-13 and PPSV-23), varicella, human papil-
loma virus, inactivated infl uenza vaccine, hepatitis A vaccine, and 
herpes zoster) should be initiated ideally before use of biologic 
therapy. Th e use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided in 
IBD patients using immunomodulator therapy or biologic therapy 
(e.g., measles–mumps–rubella, vaccinia, yellow fever, live attenu-
ated infl uenza vaccine, varicella, oral polio, and BCG). Vaccination 
status ideally should be reviewed and updated at diagnosis. Live 
vaccines should be avoided aft er initiation of systemic immune 
suppressive therapy ( 225 ).
 Th e safety profi le in randomized controlled studies of biologi-
cal agents is generally favorable, but a few patients may experience 
severe side eff ects. Individuals at increased risks for use of anti-
TNF therapy include patients with prior demyelinating disorders 
(e.g., optic neuritis and multiple sclerosis), patients with congestive 
heart failure, and individuals who have had prior lymphoma or 
known malignancies. Infectious complications may occur with the 
use of these agents, and thus vigilance is advocated when treating 
these patients ( 226 ).
 Biosimilar anti-TNF agents
 Biosimilar infl iximab and biosimilar adalimumab are eff ective 
treatments for patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease 
and can be used for de novo induction and maintenance therapy 
(Summary Statement). 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
21
 Insuffi  cient data exist to support the safety and effi  cacy of switch-
ing patients in stable disease maintenance from one biosimilar to 
another of the same biosimilar molecule (Summary Statement). 
 Th ere are currently biosimilars for infl iximab (infl iximab-dyyb, 
CT-P13 (Infl ectra Pfi zer, Remsima Celltrion), infl iximab-abda 
(Renfl exis, Merck and Samsung Bioepsis), Infl iximab-qbtx (Ixifi , 
Pfi zer) and adalimumab as adalimumab-atto (Amjevita, Amgen) 
as well as adalimumab-adbm (Cyltezo, Boehringer Ingelheim) 
that have gained regulatory approval for use in patients with CD. 
Unlike the generics of small-molecule drugs, exact replicas cannot 
be made of biologics because of their structural complexity and 
complicated manufacturing process. Th eir amino acid sequences 
remain the same but they may diff er in their glycosylation patterns. 
It is important to recognize that diff erent patterns in glycosylation 
infl uence a molecule’s solubility, stability, clearance, immunogenic-
ity, and immune eff ector function. Th us, it is important to stress 
that biosimilars diff er from small-molecule generics. A biosimilar 
is a biological product that is highly similar to the reference prod-
uct notwithstanding minor diff erences in clinically inactive com-
ponents; there are no clinically meaningful diff erences between the 
biosimilar product and the reference product in terms of safety, 
purity, and potency. Th e biosimilar must have the same strength 
and dosage form (injectable, for example) and route of administra-
tion as the reference product. Th e approval pathway for biosimilars 
diff ers from that of the originator biologic—the primary emphasis is 
on analytical characterization, preclinical/animal studies, and phar-
macokinetic studies. Once these have been demonstrated, clinical 
studies demonstrating pharmacokinetics, effi  cacy, and safety that 
are similar to the originator biologic in one indication for which the 
drug is approved are oft en suffi  cient for extrapolation to all indica-
tions. Interchangeable biosimilars represent agents that are similar 
to the US licensed reference product that are expected to produce 
the same clinical result to the reference product in any given patient, 
even aft er multiple switches between the reference and biosimilar 
products. If a product is indicated for multiple administrations, 
then the product must be able to be alternated with the reference 
product without any loss of effi  cacy or change in risk of adverse 
eff ects. An interchangeable biosimilar can be substituted at the 
pharmacy level without the intervention of a health-care provider. 
Interchangeability is a federal designation that may or may not be 
followed at the state level, and this is where the substitution laws can 
vary from state to state. Th e ability of a pharmacist to substitute a 
biosimilar for an innovator drug will be determined by each state’s 
pharmacy board, not by the FDA interchangeability designation.
 Despite the potential advantages of cost savings and improved 
patient access with biosimilars, there exist concerns by some that 
small diff erences in the effi  cacy and safety of these molecules may 
be magnifi ed in less anti-TNF-responsive diseases such as IBD, 
leading to altered immunogenicity and drug metabolism. A large 
randomized, non-inferiority phase 4 trial of patients with CD, 
ulcerative colitis, spondyloarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic 
arthritis, and plaque psoriasis showed that switching from infl ixi-
mab originator to CT-P13 (biosimilar) was not inferior to contin-
ued therapy with the originator ( 224 ).
 Th ere are no data guiding physicians on whether we can switch 
from an innovator biologic to a biosimilar if mandated, and then 
switch back to the innovator if clinically necessary or whether 
there are changes in contractual arrangements. In addition, the 
role of potentially using immunomodulators to lessen immuno-
genicity requires further assessment.
 Agents targeting leukocyte traffi  cking 
 Recommendations
 27 .  For patients with moderately to severely active CD and objec-
tive evidence of active disease, anti-integrin therapy (with 
vedolizumab) with or without an immunomodulator is more 
eff ective than placebo and should be considered to be used for 
induction of symptomatic remission in patients with Crohn’s 
disease (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 28 .  Natalizumab is more eff ective than placebo and should be 
considered to be used for induction of symptomatic response 
and remission in patients with active Crohn’s disease (strong 
recommendation, high level of evidence) 
 29 .  Natalizumab should be used for maintenance of natali-
zumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease only if serum 
antibody to John Cunningham (JC) virus is negative. Testing 
for anti-JC virus antibody should be repeated every 6 months 
and treatment stopped if the result is positive ( 227,228 ) 
 (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Inhibitors of leukocyte traffi  cking recently have expanded the 
therapeutic options for patients with CD. Natalizumab, an anti-α 4 
integrin antibody, broadly interferes with leukocyte traffi  cking 
systemically and inhibits binding to both vascular cell adhesion 
molecule-1 and mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1. 
Although eff ective in patients who have failed other agents, the 
risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), caused 
by JC virus, is as high as 1 in 100 among patients with JC virus 
antibody positivity, prior use of immunosuppressive agents, and 2 
or more years of use. Treatment with natalizumab is best limited to 
those patients who are not seropositive for anti-JC virus antibody 
that should be checked before initiating therapy and at minimum 
every 6 months thereaft er.
 In contrast, vedolizumab (Entyvio) selectively inhibits α 4β 7 
integrin interaction with mucosal addressin cell adhesion mol-
ecule-1, making it relatively specifi c for leukocyte traffi  cking to the 
gut. Th is agent has historically been used in adult patients with 
moderately to severely active CD who have had an inadequate 
response with, lost response to, or were intolerant to a TNF blocker 
or immunomodulator, or had an inadequate response with, were 
intolerant to, or demonstrated dependence on corticosteroids. To 
date, no cases of PML have been reported with the use of vedoli-
zumab that is eff ective for patients who have active, symptomatic 
CD despite treatment with corticosteroids, thiopurines, metho-
trexate, or anti-TNF agents. Th is agent has been used to achieve 
clinical response, clinical remission, and corticosteroid-free remis-
sion ( 229–232 ). It is important to also recognize that this medica-
tion can also be positioned before use of these agents and failure 
of other agents is not mandatory or advocated. For patients with 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
22
moderately to severely active CD and objective evidence of active 
disease, vedolizumab, with or without an immunomodulator, is 
more eff ective than placebo for induction of response, remission, 
and achieve mucosal healing. Th e onset of the clinical eff ect of ved-
olizumab may be slower than with anti-TNF agents in CD. Patients 
who have received prior treatment with anti-TNF agents in par-
ticular require longer treatment, with effi  cacy rates at 10 weeks 
equaling those of anti-TNF-naive patients at 6 weeks. As with all 
biologic agents, concomitant therapy with an immunomodulator 
reduces rates of anti-vedolizumab antibodies. However, prospec-
tive clinical trials comparing therapeutic strategies of vedolizumab 
monotherapy with combination therapy with an immune modula-
tor have not been reported. A recent network meta-analysis sug-
gests that adalimumab or combination therapy with infl iximab 
and azathioprine is more eff ective than vedolizumab in inducing 
and maintaining remission in CD ( 206 ).
 Agents targeting IL-12/23 (anti-p40 antibody) 
 Recommendations
 30 .  Ustekinumab should be given for moderate-to-severe Crohn’s 
disease patients who have failed previous treatment with corti-
costeroids, thiopurines, methotrexate, or anti-TNF inhibitors, 
or who have had no prior exposure to anti-TNF inhibitors 
( 233 )  (strong recommendation, high level of evidence). 
 Ustekinumab, an anti-p40 antibody that inhibits IL-12 and -23, 
is effi  cacious in patients with CD whose prior treatments have 
included corticosteroids, immunomodulators, or anti-TNF agents. 
Stated another way, effi  cacy for induction of remission has been 
demonstrated in both the anti-TNF-failure and conventional 
therapy-failure populations ( 233 ). An extensive safety database 
in patients with psoriasis demonstrates an excellent safety profi le, 
without apparent increase in serious infections or malignancies 
( 234 ). Th is favorable safety profi le appears consistent with data 
from clinical trials of ustekinumab in CD, although with less accu-
mulated long-term exposure, and despite higher doses being used. 
No head-to-head studies have yet directly compared the effi  cacy of 
ustekinumab with vedolizumab or with anti-TNF agents. Lacking 
such data, the choice of fi rst biologic is at the discretion of the pro-
vider and patient according to individual risk–benefi t preferences.
 Other medications 
 Recommendations
 31 .  Cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus should 
not be used for Crohn’s disease ( 213,235–241 )  (strong recom-
mendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Despite its effi  cacy in ulcerative colitis, cyclosporine has not 
been demonstrated to be eff ective in CD. Tacrolimus, another cal-
cineurin inhibitor, has been studied only in small, uncontrolled 
case series, with some suggestion of benefi t for luminal disease 
( 239,241 ). In addition, mycophenolate mofetil, an inhibitor of 
inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, has not been shown to be 
effi  cacious in CD. Th alidomide may be eff ective in severe CD, but 
should be used only in exceptional circumstances, given the high 
risk of serious adverse eff ects that include sedation, constipation, 
peripheral neuropathy, and severe birth defects ( 242 ).
 Severe/fulminant disease
 Recommendations
 32 .  Intravenous corticosteroids should be used to treat severe or 
fulminant Crohn’s disease ( 243 )  (conditional recommenda-
tion, moderate level of evidence). 
 33 .  Anti-TNF agents (infl iximab, adalimumab, certolizumab 
pegol) can be considered to treat severely active Crohn’s disease 
( 216–220 )  (strong recommendation, moderate level evidence). 
 34 .  Infl iximab may be administered to treat fulminant Crohn’s 
disease (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 Although not well studied, intravenous corticosteroids are 
deemed to be eff ective for more severe or fulminant disease in the 
hospitalized patient. Parenteral methylprednisolone is eff ective for 
acute treatment of severe disease, with doses from 40 to 60 mg/
day. An additional use of corticosteroids is in preventing anti-drug 
antibodies by administering as a bolus before infusion of infl ixi-
mab. Pivotal trials of infl iximab, adalimumab, and certolizumab 
pegol included patients with moderate-to-severe disease activity 
as indicated by the CDAI. Th ese agents may be eff ective in patients 
with severe disease; however, it should be noted that patients with 
the most severe symptomatic disease, generally with CDAI scores 
greater than 450, were excluded. Clinical experience suggests that 
some patients with the most severely symptomatic infl ammatory 
CD may respond to TNF inhibition. For more fulminant cases, inf-
liximab may be eff ective, whereas the effi  cacy of adalimumab and 
certolizumab pegol in such cases is less certain. Th is may, in part, 
be attributed to the weight-based dosing used for infl iximab that 
leads to generally higher doses than with adalimumab and certoli-
zumab pegol, and that may be more eff ective when there is a higher 
burden of infl ammation.
 FISTULIZING CROHN’S DISEASE
 Perianal/ﬁ stulizing disease
 Recommendations
 35 .  Infl iximab is eff ective and should be considered in treating 
perianal fi stulas in Crohn’s disease ( 244,245 )  (strong recom-
mendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 36 .  Infl iximab may be eff ective and should be considered in 
treating enterocutaneous and rectovaginal fi stulas in Crohn’s 
disease ( 245,246 )  (strong recommendation, moderate level of 
evidence). 
 37 .  Adalimumab and certolizumab pegol may be eff ective and 
should be considered in treating perianal fi stulas in Crohn’s dis-
ease ( 247,248 )  (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 38 .  Th iopurines (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine) may be eff ec-
tive and should be considered in treating fi stulizing Crohn’s 
disease ( 198 )  (strong recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 39 .  Tacrolimus can be administered for short-term treatment 
of perianal and cutaneous fi stulas in Crohn’s disease ( 240 ) 
 (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
23
 40 .  Antibiotics (imidazoles) may be eff ective and should be 
considered in treating simple perianal fi stulas ( 249 )  (strong 
recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 41 .  Th e addition of antibiotics to infl iximab is more eff ective 
than infl iximab alone and should be considered in treating 
perianal fi stulas ( 250 )  (strong recommendation, moderate 
level of evidence). 
 42 .  Drainage of abscesses (surgically or percutaneously) should 
be undertaken before treatment of fi stulizing Crohn’s disease 
with anti-TNF agents ( 251 )  (expert opinion) (conditional 
recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 43 .  Placement of setons increases the effi  cacy of infl iximab and 
should be considered in treating perianal fi stulas ( 251,252 ) 
 (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Th e presence of a perianal abscess in CD should prompt surgical 
drainage (Summary Statement). 
 Fistulizing CD is a therapeutic challenge that requires 
careful 
evaluation 
and 
coordination 
of 
care 
between 
medical and surgical providers in order to direct therapy appro-
priately.
 Fistulas occur in approximately one-third of patients with CD, 
with perianal fi stulas representing the most common location. 
Internal fi stulas rarely require therapy and are oft en asympto-
matic. If fi stulas occur and they are symptomatic and represent 
major fi stulas (stomach to ileum; mid or proximal small bowel to 
colon) and are associated with diarrhea or small intestinal bacte-
rial overgrowth, then surgery or medical therapy is advocated. 
Before initiation of immunosuppressive therapy with agents 
such as biologic therapy or antimetabolite therapy (azathioprine, 
6-mercaptopurine, or methotrexate), pyogenic complications 
such as abscess should be excluded with cross-sectional imag-
ing. If abscesses are present they should be treated initially with 
drainage before initiation of biologic therapy or immunosup-
pression ( 253 ).
 Small (<5 mm) abscesses may not require surgical drainage. For 
asymptomatic simple perianal fi stulas, no treatment is required. 
Symptomatic simple fi stulas may be treated with noncutting setons 
or fi stulotomy. Complex fi stulae with or without abscess should 
be treated with seton placement ( 254 ), typically in combination 
with appropriate medical therapy. Th e timing of seton removal 
depends on subsequent therapy and drainage of abscess. A surgical 
advancement fl ap may close simple fi stula or complex fi stula, for 
example rectovaginal fi stula, in the setting of no active infection or 
infl ammation ( 255–257 ).
 Th e presence of high-output fi stulas typically mandates sur-
gical intervention (proximal bowel diversion, bowel segment 
resection, or surgical fi stula closure) and historically do not close 
spontaneously or with medical therapy. Low-output fi stulas may 
be treated with antimetabolite therapy or biologic therapy alone 
or in combination with each other; however, the evidence sup-
porting the use of anti-metabolite is not very robust. In addition, 
these agents can be used individually or in combination with 
antibiotics.
 When assessing patients with perianal fi stulas (the most com-
mon fi stula location in patients with CD) we categorize the fi stulas 
as either simple (located distal to the dentate line primarily in the 
anal sphincter region with a single track) or complex. A complex 
fi stula can be transsphincteric, suprasphincteric, and intersphinc-
teric in its location and may have multiple fi stula tracts. Th is clas-
sifi cation is important to perform as treatments may diff er among 
these categories.
 In the absence of active mucosal involvement in the rectum, 
patients with simple fi stulas who have CD may respond well to fi s-
tulotomy or mucosal advancement fl ap surgery, whereas patients 
with mucosal involvement may benefi t from seton placement 
rather than fi stulotomy. Consideration may also be given to immu-
nomodulators, vedolizumab, or anti-TNF-α agents, with the best 
evidence supporting the effi  cacy of infl iximab.
 Th e optimal management of complex perianal fi stulas should 
include a combination of surgery with an anti-TNF. Th e surgery 
involves an exam under anesthesia with identifi cation of abscesses 
and fi stula tracts. Th e pelvic sepsis related to fi stula abscesses 
leads to tissue destruction of the tissue, anal sphincter, and more 
extensive perianal, gynecologic, and genitourinary complications. 
To that end, any fi stula with an abscess or complex fi stula (i.e., 
involving the anal sphincter, vagina, or multiple tracts) should 
be drained of infection. Setons are the most common method to 
allow for continued drainage of infection and infl ammatory fi s-
tula tracts and should be performed before initiation of immu-
nosuppression ( 258 ). Several studies have shown the benefi t of 
placement of setons followed by infl iximab. Th e combination of 
a seton with infl iximab has demonstrated a better overall fi stula 
healing response, longer duration of fi stula closure and preven-
tion of repeated abscess, and lower overall fi stula recurrence rate 
( 252,259,260 ). In the setting of signifi cant refractory disease a 
proximal diversion to enable rectal and/or perianal healing may 
be necessary. Aft er the diversion, initiation of a new therapy such 
as anti-TNF therapy with or without an immunomodulator addi-
tionally may promote healing of the perineal disease. However, a 
systematic review suggests that the long-term success of diverting 
ostomy for perianal CD is very low ( 261 ). In very severe clinical 
scenarios, proctectomy or total proctocolectomy with permanent 
stoma may be necessary. Surgical advancement fl aps play a role in 
the improvement of long-term healing rates in combination with 
an anti-TNF ( 262 ).
 Internal fi stulas remain more diffi  cult to treat. Internal fi stulas 
may occur in the form of rectovaginal fi stulas, enterovesical (or 
colovesical) fi stulas, or enteroenteric fi stulas. Appropriate man-
agement of rectovaginal fi stulas classically entails use of medi-
cal therapy with immunomodulator therapy (monotherapy with 
azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine or anti-TNF antibody or combina-
tion therapy with both) as initial treatment. Th is treatment regimen 
is usually considered before surgery. Th e goal of medical therapy 
is to heal the infl amed bowel mucosa and then subsequently to 
enable surgical intervention. Surgical options for the treatment of 
rectovaginal fi stulas might include excision of the fi stula and the 
interposition of healthy tissue between the rectum and vagina. In 
general, the surrounding tissues are best when not infl amed. Th e 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
24
presence of any active infection should be treated and resolved 
before attempting repair. Aft er fi stula excision the treatment with 
a mucosal advancement fl ap can then be performed. In a similar 
manner, enterovesical or colovesical fi stulas may be treated with 
immunomodulator therapy or anti-TNF antibodies, or both, but 
the occurrence of recurrent symptomatic urinary tract infection is 
a relative indication for surgery (especially if associated with pyelo-
nephritis). Surgery usually involves resection of involved infl amed 
bowel and closure of the bladder defect.
 Finally, enteroenteric fi stulas (such as ileum to ileum) may be 
present and asymptomatic. As these fi stulas are asymptomatic 
they do not require surgical management; however, treatment 
with immunomodulator therapy or anti-TNF antibodies, or both, 
might be initiated. Major symptomatic internal fi stulas, such as 
gastrocolic and coloduodenal fi stulas, may cause symptoms as they 
bypass part of the intestine. If medical management fails or if an 
abscess develops, surgical intervention is recommended.
 A variety of diff erent medications have been used to treat fi stulas 
in patients with CD. Mesalamine and corticosteroids are ineff ec-
tive treatments for fi stulizing CD.
 Although poorly studied, antibiotics may heal simple, superfi cial 
perianal fi stulas, with minimal penetration of sphincter muscula-
ture, and play an adjunctive role in treating perianal sepsis asso-
ciated with more complex fi stulas. Simple fi stulas respond well 
to medical therapy. Metronidazole and ciprofl oxacin have been 
evaluated in the management of perianal CD ( 263–266 ). Typical 
initial medical therapy might include therapy with metronidazole 
(10 to 20 mg/kg/day orally for 4 to 8 weeks) and/or ciprofl oxacin 
(500 mg orally twice daily for 4 to 8 weeks) or levofl oxacin (500–
750 mg once daily for 4 to 8 weeks) for the fi stula and treatment 
of concurrent mucosal disease. Antibiotics (e.g., metronidazole, 
ciprofl oxacin, and levofl oxacin) improve fi stula symptoms and 
may be associated with healing of simple fi stulas. Metronidazole 
and ciprofl oxacin have not been eff ective at healing complex peri-
anal fi stulas, but may improve symptoms related to the fi stula ( 249 ). 
Antibiotics are most commonly administered for active infection, 
but rarely replace the need for surgical drainage of an abscess. Th ere 
have been recent warnings for the occurrence of tendonitis, tendon 
rupture, and neuropathy when using the fl uoroquinolones.
 Th iopurines, although poorly studied, may also lead to reduc-
tion of the symptoms of perianal fi stulas, but can be slow in onset 
of eff ect. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine have been shown to 
be eff ective for treating fi stulizing CD. Tacrolimus is eff ective for 
short-term treatment of fi stulizing CD; however, signifi cant toxic-
ity precludes long-term therapy with this agent
 Th e anti-TNFs are eff ective for closure of perianal fi stula, but 
only infl iximab has been studied in a prospective, randomized 
controlled trial. In the initial study, infl iximab 5 mg/kg at 0, 2, 
and 6 weeks led to cessation of all drainage of perianal fi stula on 
2 consecutive visits 1 month apart, defi ned as complete closure, 
in the majority of patients.( 244 ) A subsequent, large randomized 
controlled trial confi rmed the effi  cacy of infl iximab for induction 
of closure of perianal fi stula, but also every 8 week dosing at 5 mg/
kg for maintenance of complete closure and response, defi ned as 
>50% closure on clinical assessment ( 245 ). Infl iximab may also 
be eff ective at maintaining response of rectovaginal fi stula clo-
sure ( 246 ). Subsequent studies from clinical practice cohorts have 
replicated the effi  cacy of infl iximab for the induction of perianal 
fi stula closure and maintenance of response ( 267,268 ). Although 
not as thoroughly studied, adalimumab may also be eff ective in 
treating signs and symptoms of perianal fi stulas. Perianal fi stula 
closure was not a primary end point of any of the adalimumab or 
certolizumab studies. On  post hoc analysis from two adalimumab 
CD studies, there was no benefi t over placebo for fi stula closure 
( 269,270 ). In a large maintenance study of adalimumab for CD, 
fi stula response and remission was a secondary end point that was 
achieved in a higher percentage of patients compared with placebo 
( 218,220,271,272 ). A small open-label trial of adalimumab also 
suggested a benefi t for fi stula induction of remission and mainte-
nance of closure ( 272 ). Similarly, there is a suggestion of effi  cacy 
based upon  post hoc analysis of certolizumab pegol, vedolizumab, 
and ustekinumab trials, but no controlled studies indicating une-
quivocal benefi t in fi stulizing CD ( 220,273,274 ). In addition, the 
use of combination therapy with anti-TNF therapy and antibiot-
ics may be more benefi cial than each agent individually. Combi-
nation therapy with ciprofl oxacin and infl iximab or ciprofl oxacin 
and adalimumab has been shown to be more eff ective than mono-
therapy for each anti-TNF agent to treat fi stulas and is eff ective in 
reduction of fi stula drainage.
 MAINTENANCE THERAPY OF LUMINAL CROHN’S 
DISEASE
 No maintenance treatment is a treatment option for some patients 
with asymptomatic (silent), mild Crohn’s disease (Summary State-
ment). 
 Surgery may be considered for patients with symptomatic Crohn’s 
disease localized to a short segment of bowel ( Summary Statement). 
 Recommendations
 44 .  Once remission is induced with corticosteroids, a thiopurine 
or methotrexate should be considered (strong recommenda-
tion, moderate level of evidence). 
 45 .  Patients who are steroid dependent should be started on thio-
purines or methotrexate with or without anti-TNF therapy 
(strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Corticosteroids are not indicated for long-term treatment of 
CD because of lack of effi  cacy for maintenance of remission and 
adverse eff ects ( 275 ). Th ere are three scenarios by which a thiopu-
rine is used aft er corticosteroid induction of remission. One sce-
nario is to initiate the thiopurine at the time of the fi rst course of 
corticosteroid, the second is aft er repeated courses of corticoster-
oids or in patients who are corticosteroid dependent (i.e., unable to 
taper the steroid without CD relapse), and the third is as a concom-
itant medication to an anti-TNF. Th e effi  cacy of 6-mercaptopurine 
1.5 mg/kg/day as a maintenance medication when administered in 
combination with the fi rst course of corticosteroid for newly diag-
nosed pediatric CD is good ( 276 ). Presumably, the same effi  cacy 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
25
would be realized with azathioprine in an adult population, but a 
randomized open-label study of early use of azathioprine in CD 
was unable to demonstrate a benefi t with respect to time in clinical 
remission ( 277 ). Th e most common scenario for maintenance of 
remission with a thiopurine is that of a corticosteroid-dependent 
patient. Th ere are several studies that have demonstrated that aza-
thioprine 2.5 mg/kg/day and 6 mercaptopurine 1.5 mg/kg/day are 
eff ective for the maintenance of remission in CD ( 181,278–282 ). 
Th e combination of a thiopurine with an anti-TNF will be dis-
cussed separately in the “Anti-TNF maintenance” section. Meth-
otrexate is also eff ective as a corticosteroid-sparing agent for the 
maintenance of CD remission ( 283,284 ). Parenterally (SC or IM) 
administered methotrexate at a dose of 25 mg per week is eff ective 
for maintenance of remission in CD aft er steroid induction ( 285 ). 
If steroid-free remission is maintained with parenteral methotrex-
ate at 25 mg per week for 4 months, the dose of methotrexate may 
be lowered to 15 mg per week ( 204 ). Data demonstrating effi  cacy 
of the use of oral methotrexate for maintenance of remission in 
patients with CD are lacking. It is perceived that patients with nor-
mal small bowel absorption may be started on or switched from 
parenteral to oral methotrexate at 15 mg to 25 mg once per week; 
however, controlled data evaluating this contention are lacking. 
Similarly, a low dose of oral methotrexate (12.5 mg once per week) 
has been demonstrated to be eff ective at preventing immunogenic-
ity to a monoclonal antibody biologic agent.
 Recommendations
 46 .  Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid has not been demonstrated to be 
eff ective for maintenance of medically induced remission in 
patients with Crohn’s disease, and is not recommended for 
long-term treatment (strong recommendation, moderate 
level of evidence). 
 Data are lacking demonstrating the eff ectiveness of sulfasalazine or 
of olsalazine for the maintenance of medically induced remission in 
patients with Crohn’s disease and these agents are not recommended 
for long-term treatment ( Summary Statement) 
 5-Aminosalicylates have been extensively studied for main-
tenance of medically induced remission of CD and have shown 
limited benefi t. Th ere were 11 placebo-controlled trials ranging in 
doses between 1 and 4 g per day and the duration of maintenance 
treatment between 4 months and 36 months, with most evaluated 
12-month duration ( 286–296 ). Four of the studies reported a sig-
nifi cant decrease in CD relapse compared with placebo ( P < 0.05); 
however, the other 7 studies showed no prevention of relapse. Th ere 
were 5 meta-analyses evaluating the effi  cacy of mesalamine for the 
maintenance of medically induced remission in patients with CD 
( 173,297–300 ). Th e number of trials evaluated in the meta-analyses 
ranged from 7 to 10 with a total of 941 patients to 1,500 patients in 
each analysis. Although most of the meta-analyses showed a clini-
cally signifi cant benefi t of mesalamine for maintenance of remission, 
the 95% CI for the odds ratio either crossed unity or approached 
unity. Th e therapeutic advantage between mesalamine and control 
was <10% for most meta-analyses with a number needed to treat 
(NNT) over 15. Given the totality of data, 5-ASA is not recom-
mended for maintenance of medically induced remission.
 Recommendations
 47 .  Corticosteroids are not eff ective for maintenance of medi-
cally induced remission in Crohn’s disease and should not be 
used for long-term treatment (strong recommendation, mod-
erate level of evidence). 
 48 .  Budesonide should not be used to maintain remission of 
Crohn’s disease beyond 4 months (strong recommendation, 
moderate level of evidence). 
 Corticosteroids are eff ective for induction of remission of CD 
but are not eff ective for maintenance. Th e use of corticosteroids 
should not exceed 3 continuous months without attempting to 
introduce corticosteroid-sparing agents (such as biologic therapy 
or immunomodulators). In a meta-analysis including 403 patients 
with surgically or medically induced remission, corticosteroids 
were not eff ective at maintaining remission ( 275 ) Th e rates of 
remission were no diff erent between placebo and corticosteroids at 
6, 12, and 24 months. Th e adverse events associated with corticos-
teroids were signifi cantly higher than placebo at all time points and 
should not be used for maintenance of remission. Enteric-coated 
budesonide has been demonstrated to prolong the time to recur-
rence of symptoms for patients with mild-to-moderate ileocecal 
CD, but has not been shown to be eff ective at maintenance of 
remission. Th ere were six randomized placebo-controlled studies 
evaluating maintenance of remission of budesonide ( 301–306 ). Th e 
12-month relapse rates for 3 to 6 mg budesonide ranged from 40 to 
74% and were not signifi cantly diff erent than placebo. One study 
did show a reduction in the relapse rate compared with placebo, 
but this occurred at an early time point of 3 months ( 304 ). Four 
meta-analyses have been published on the effi  cacy of budesonide 
for maintenance of remission in CD. Th e results are mixed with 
most showing no benefi t in maintenance of remission with only 
slight improvements in mean time to symptom relapse ( 307–310 ). 
Th e budesonide meta-analyses included doses of budesonide at 3 
and 6 mg and reported increased adverse events compared with 
placebo. Abnormal adrenocorticoid stimulation tests and altera-
tion in bone mineral density were higher in budesonide compared 
with placebo but lower than conventional glucocorticosteroids.
 Recommendations
 49 .  Anti-TNF therapy, specifi cally infl iximab, adalimumab, and 
certolizumab pegol, should be used to maintain remission of 
anti-TNF-induced remission (strong recommendation, high 
level of evidence). 
 50 .  Anti-TNF monotherapy is eff ective at maintaining anti-
TNF-induced remission, but because of the potential for 
immunogenicity and loss of response, combination with 
azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine or methotrexate should be con-
sidered (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Infl iximab, adalimumab, and certolizumab pegol are eff ec-
tive for maintenance of medically induced remission of luminal 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
26
CD, and numerous clinical trials have supported the use of anti-
TNFs beyond induction ( 218,219,273,311–314 ). Th ere has been 
one meta-analysis and one Cochrane Database Systematic review 
evaluating anti-TNFs for maintenance of remission ( 315 ). In the 
meta-analysis, CD patients who responded to induction anti-TNF 
were more likely to maintain remission through 52 weeks with an 
anti-TNF compared with placebo. Th e safety of maintenance anti-
TNF therapy was also evaluated. Th ere were 21 studies evaluated 
with a total of 5,356 individuals, and anti-TNF therapy did not 
increase the risk of serious infection, malignancy, or death com-
pared with placebo. In the Cochrane Database review, the pooled 
analysis of 5 or 10 mg/kg infl iximab every 8 weeks was found to 
be superior to placebo for maintenance of remission and clinical 
response to week 54, 400 mg certolizumab pegol every 4 weeks 
was superior to placebo for maintenance of remission and clinical 
response to week 26, and 40 mg adalimumab every other week or 
every week was superior to placebo for maintenance of clinical 
remission to week 54 ( 217 ). Adverse events were equal between 
anti-TNF therapy and placebo, but the authors noted lymphoma 
and tuberculosis at higher rates in certain individual trials.
 Combination therapy with an anti-TNF and an immunomodu-
lator has been demonstrated to improve short-term effi  cacy com-
pared with monotherapy ( 221 ). Th e combination of a thiopurine 
or methotrexate with anti-TNF therapy reduces immunogenicity 
and the authors recommend this strategy ( 316,317 ). Some evi-
dence suggests that immunogenicity may be avoided in monother-
apy simply by maintaining robust trough levels of biologic therapy 
at all times, and that the primary eff ect of immunomodulator in 
combination therapy is in nonspecifi cally increasing trough bio-
logic concentrations ( 318 ).
 Th e benefi ts and risks of combination therapy must be indi-
vidualized. Th ere is a higher risk of lymphoma in patients treated 
with azathioprine or 6 mercaptopurine, especially among males 
and those patients diagnosed at younger ages ( 197 ). Th ere is also a 
rare but increased risk of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma that has 
been reported when a thiopurine is combined with an anti-TNF 
( 319 ). Th ere is no higher risk of opportunistic infections with the 
combination of thiopurines and anti-TNFs compared with either 
medication alone ( 27,320,321 ).
 Recommendations
 51 .  Vedolizumab should be used for maintenance of remission of 
vedolizumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease (condi-
tional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 52 .  Natalizumab should be considered for maintenance of remis-
sion of natalizumab-induced remission of Crohn’s disease 
patients only if JC virus is negative (conditional recommen-
dation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Natalizumab monotherapy is eff ective for the maintenance of 
natalizumab-induced remission of CD ( 322,323 ). Natalizumab 
300 mg every 4 weeks was superior to placebo in maintaining clini-
cal response and clinical remission through week 36. Because of an 
increased risk of PML, all patients must be tested for the JC virus 
every 6 months, and should not receive natalizumab if positive 
( 324 ). Natalizumab should not be used in combination with immu-
nosuppressive therapy because of the increased risk of PML.
 Vedolizumab monotherapy is eff ective at maintaining vedoli-
zumab-induced response or remission ( 232 ). Vedolizumab 300 mg 
every 8 weeks was superior to placebo in maintaining clinical 
response and remission through week 54. Because of the gut-selec-
tive nature of vedolizumab, there is no central nervous system uptake, 
unlike natalizumab. To date, there has not been a reported case of 
PML with vedolizumab. Vedolizumab may be administered as mon-
otherapy; however, because of the potential for immunogenicity and 
loss of response, combination with azathioprine/6 mercaptopurine or 
methotrexate may be considered. Th e risks and benefi ts of combina-
tion therapy should be evaluated in each individual patient.
 Recommendations
 53 .  Ustekinumab should be used for maintenance of remission of 
ustekinumab-induced response of Crohn’s disease (condi-
tional recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Subcutaneous ustekinumab monotherapy has been shown to be 
eff ective for maintaining clinical remission among those moder-
ate-to-severe CD patients who had demonstrated clinical response 
to an intravenous induction dose of ustekinumab, and this held 
true for those who had failed conventional therapy and those who 
had failed anti-TNF therapy ( 233 ).
 POSTOPERATIVE CROHN’S DISEASE: MAINTENANCE, 
PREVENTION, AND TREATMENT
 Prophylactic treatment is recommended aft er small intestinal resection 
in patients with risk factors for recurrence (Summary Statement). 
 Recommendations
 54 .  All patients who have Crohn’s disease should quit smoking 
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 Several risk factors have been identifi ed that increase the like-
lihood of postoperative CD recurrence ( 325 ). Th e three factors 
that portend the greatest risk for postoperative recurrence are: 
(i) active tobacco smoking aft er surgery, especially in women and 
heavy smokers; (ii) patients with penetrating disease (i.e., fi stu-
las, abscesses, and intestinal perforation); and (iii) those with 
two or more prior surgeries. Patients who have these risk fac-
tors should receive postoperative CD medication in an attempt 
to prevent future recurrence ( 326 ). Although not formally stud-
ied, those patients who progress to surgery despite treatment 
with an immunomodulator or biologic agent probably represent 
a uniquely aggressive CD phenotype and are at a high risk of 
postoperative recurrence. Other risk factors for postoperative 
recurrence include: a shorter duration between the time of diag-
nosis and surgery (<10 years), disease location in the ileum and 
colon (rather than ileum alone), perianal fi stula, more severe 
disease leading to surgery, a longer segment of bowel requiring 
resection, and the need for corticosteroids before surgery. Th e 
only modifi able risk factor for postoperative CD recurrence is 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
27
cigarette smoking, and all patients should be strongly encour-
aged to quit ( 327 ).
 Recommendations
 55 .  Mesalamine is of limited benefi t in preventing postoperative 
Crohn’s disease, but in addition to no treatment is an option 
for patients with an isolated ileal resection and no risk factors 
for recurrence ( conditional recommendation, moderate level 
of evidence). 
 Mesalamine is a safe but minimally eff ective medication to pre-
vent postoperative CD recurrence ( 328–333 ). A Cochrane analy-
sis found that mesalamine reduced clinical recurrence (RR, 0.76; 
95% CI, 0.62–0.94) and severe endoscopic recurrence (RR, 0.50; 
95% CI, 0.29–0.84) compared with placebo, but with a NNT of 12 
and 8, respectively ( 329,334 ). A subsequent systematic review and 
meta-analysis concluded that mesalamine is of only modest ben-
efi t in preventing postoperative recurrence compared with placebo 
( 335 ). Th e meta-analysis included 11 randomized controlled tri-
als with a total of 1,282 patients, and found that 5-ASAs reduced 
relapse compared with placebo (RR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.74–0.99), but 
with a NNT of 13. Th e 5-ASAs were also analyzed separately as sul-
fasalazine and mesalamine. Sulfasalazine did not prevent relapse 
compared with placebo (RR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.72–1.31) and mesa-
lamine prevented relapse compared with placebo or no treatment 
(RR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.70–0.92) but with a NNT of 10. Overall, mesa-
lamine should only be considered if immunosuppressive therapy is 
not warranted or is contraindicated.
 Recommendations
 56 .  Imidazole antibiotics (metronidazole and ornidazole) at 
doses between 1 and 2 g/day can be used aft er small intestinal 
resection in Crohn’s disease patients to prevent recurrence 
(conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 Metronidazole (20 mg/kg) may signifi cantly reduce the inci-
dence of severe (i3-4) ( Supplementary Information online) endo-
scopic recurrent disease compared with placebo-treated patients 
at 3 months aft er surgery and clinical recurrence at 1 year ( 336 ). 
Ornidazole (1 g/day) also decreases postoperative clinical recur-
rence at 1 year ( 337 ). However, the benefi t from metronidazole 
and ornidazole in preventing CD recurrence is lost when these 
medications are stopped. In placebo-controlled trials, nearly 50% 
of patients were intolerant to the antibiotics, and this postopera-
tive prevention strategy is not sustainable for most patients. Com-
bining metronidazole (1 g/day) for 3 months with azathioprine 
(100–150 mg/day) for 12 months reduces endoscopic recurrent 
disease (i2-4) at 1 year aft er surgery compared with those patients 
just receiving metronidazole ( 338 ).
 Recommendations
 57 .  Th iopurines may be used to prevent clinical and endoscopic 
recurrence and are more eff ective than mesalamine or placebo. 
However, they are not eff ective at preventing severe endoscopic 
recurrence (strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence). 
 Th iopurines have been extensively studied for the prevention of 
postoperative CD with some trials showing benefi t and others not 
( 338–342 ). Subsequently, there have been one Cochrane analysis 
and two meta-analyses. In the Cochrane analysis, thiopurines were 
found to signifi cantly reduce clinical recurrence (RR, 0.59; 95% CI, 
0.38–0.92; NNT=7) and severe endoscopic recurrence (RR, 0.64; 95 
CI, 0.44–0.92; NNT=4) compared with placebo and was found to 
be superior to mesalamine ( 334 ). Similar fi ndings were reported in 
a concurrent meta-analysis of four controlled trials, in which thio-
purines were determined to be more eff ective than placebo for pre-
venting clinical recurrence at 1 year (mean diff erence, 8%; 95% CI, 
1–15%;  P =0.021; NNT=13) and 2 years (mean diff erence, 13%; 95% 
CI, 2–24%;  P =0.018; NNT=8) aft er surgery, and endoscopic recur-
rence (i2-4) (mean diff erence, 23%; 95% CI, 9–37%;  P =0.0016; 
NNT=4) at 1 year aft er surgery ( 343 ). In another meta-analysis of 
fi ve controlled trials, thiopurines were determined to be no more 
eff ective than placebo or mesalamine (controls) for preventing 
clinical recurrence (year 1 RR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.60–1.30;  P =0.53 and 
year 2 RR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.55–1.05;  P =0.10), but were more eff ec-
tive at preventing endoscopic recurrence (year 1 RR, 0.71; 95% CI, 
0.53–0.94;  P =0.02) ( 344 ). Th ere were signifi cantly more adverse 
events leading to drug withdrawal in patients receiving thiopurines 
compared with controls (RR, 2.57; 95% CI, 1.47–4.51;  P =0.001).
 Recommendations
 58 .  In high-risk patients, anti-TNF agents should be started 
within 4 weeks of surgery in order to prevent postoperative 
Crohn’s disease recurrence (conditional recommendation, 
low level of evidence). 
 59 .  Although data are lacking in postoperative Crohn’s disease, 
anti-TNF therapy should be combined with an immunomodu-
lator to decrease immunogenicity and decrease loss of response 
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence). 
 Growing evidence demonstrates that anti-TNF therapy is the 
most eff ective treatment to prevent postoperative recurrence and 
may have the potential to change the natural course of CD aft er sur-
gery. Th ere have been multiple open-label studies of adalimumab 
and infl iximab, one small single-center randomized controlled trial 
of infl iximab, and one large international, multicenter randomized 
controlled trial of infl iximab ( 345–356 ). Two meta-analyses have 
included anti-TNFs for the effi  cacy of preventing postoperative CD 
( 357,358 ). One meta-analysis only included one anti-TNF study, 
but concluded that infl iximab was superior to placebo in preventing 
clinical and endoscopic recurrence aft er surgery for CD ( 358 ). In a 
network meta-analysis of 21 controlled trials across 5-ASAs, anti-
biotic, and immunomodulator treatments, anti-TNF monotherapy 
reduced the risk of clinical relapse (RR, 0.04; 95% CI, 0.00–0.14) and 
endoscopic relapse (RR, 0.01; 95% CI, 0.00–0.05) compared with 
placebo ( 357 ). Anti-TNF monotherapy was the most eff ective medi-
cation intervention for preventing postoperative CD recurrence, 
with large eff ect sizes relative to all other medication strategies (clini-
cal relapse RR, 0.02–0.20; endoscopic relapse RR, 0.005–0.04).
 Accordingly, the authors recommend anti-TNF therapy as fi rst-
line prophylactic therapy for patients at high risk for postoperative 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
28
recurrence or for patients who have tried and failed or are intoler-
ant of thiopurines. Whether combination thiopurine with an anti-
TNF is more eff ective than monotherapy anti-TNF is not known 
and the postoperative trials to date have only evaluated mono-
therapy. CD patients treated with combination infl iximab and aza-
thioprine have higher response and remission rates compared with 
either medication alone ( 215,221 ). Th e authors suggest combina-
tion therapy but acknowledge that monotherapy anti-TNF is an 
acceptable postoperative treatment approach.
 Risk factors for postoperative Crohn’s disease recurrence should be 
taken into account when deciding on treatment (Summary Statement). 
 Patients at low risk for postoperative CD recurrence are non-
smokers, do not have penetrating disease, and have never had a 
prior surgical resection. No treatment aft er surgery in this popu-
lation with subsequently performing a 6-month postoperative 
colonoscopy to assess for the presence of CD recurrence would be 
reasonable. Patients who are nonsmokers, who have penetrating 
disease without a prior history of surgical resection, and who have 
received no prior medication should receive thiopurines with or 
without metronidazole, and subsequently undergo a colonoscopy at 
6 months. If there is evidence of CD on the colonoscopy, then anti-
TNF therapy should be added ( 359,360 ). Patients who have had a 
prior resection within a 10-year period should receive postopera-
tive anti-TNF therapy with or without an immunomodulator and 
undergo a subsequent colonoscopy at 6 months postoperatively.
 When to refer to surgery
 Surgery is required to treat enteric complications of Crohn’s disease 
(Summary Statement). 
 A resection of a segment of diseased intestine is the most common 
surgery for a Crohn’s disease ( Summary Statement). 
 Surgery is required in CD patients with intractable hemorrhage, 
perforation, persisting or recurrent obstruction, abscess, dysplasia 
or cancer, or medically refractory disease ( 361 ). Th e most common 
indication for a surgical resection of the intestine in CD is because of 
a small bowel obstruction from a fi brostenotic stricture ( 362 ). Th e sec-
ond most common indication for bowel resection is related to pene-
trating CD (e.g., an internal fi stula or sinus tract resulting in an abscess 
or phlegmon). Although an intestinal resection is the most defi nitive 
treatment for a stricture, a stricturoplasty is an option as a bowel-pre-
serving measure in patients at risk for short gut syndrome. Th e man-
agement of CD requires a multidisciplinary approach between the 
gastroenterologist and surgeon ( 363 ). Surgery is not considered to be 
a failure of medication, and an early surgical consultation is appropri-
ate in CD patients with strictures or penetrating complications.
 Is surgery always required for intra-abdominal abscess?
 Recommendations
 60 .  An intra-abdominal abscess should be treated with antibiot-
ics and a drainage procedure, either radiographically or sur-
gically (conditional recommendation, low level of evidence). 
 Crohn’s disease patients who develop an abdominal abscess should 
undergo a surgical resection. However, some may respond to medical 
therapy aft er radiologically guided drainage (Summary Statement). 
 Th e presence of active luminal CD with a concomitant abdomi-
nal abscess is usually the result of a sinus tract or fi stula, oft en 
associated with the presence of an intestinal stricture ( 364 ). Small 
interloop abscesses may not be amenable to percutaneous drain-
age; however, most CD abscesses are accessible to ultrasono-
graphic or computed tomography-guided drainage procedures 
( 365–367 ). Once the abscess has been drained, most patients 
benefi t from a delayed surgical resection ( 368 ). Th e rationale for 
delaying intestinal resection until the abscess is drained is because 
of the fact that patients with peritonitis and intra-abdominal sep-
sis require a diverting, temporary ostomy before a surgical anas-
tomosis is created. Some patients may benefi t from a combination 
of abscess drainage followed by CD medical treatment, especially 
those with a new diagnosis and absence of stricturing disease 
( 253,369 ). To date, there are no studies comparing percutane-
ous drainage followed by delayed intestinal resection vs. medical 
therapy.
 FUTURE DIRECTIVES
 Despite the recent advances in the treatment of patients with CD, 
there still remains a large group of patients who do not respond 
adequately to our current medication armamentarium. We can-
not selectively determine whether an individual will respond to 
a particular biologic, it is more of a “wait and see” approach. We 
are now entering an era of precision medicine and have begun 
to explore factors that predict response or nonresponse. In the 
future, biological therapies for IBD are likely to be used more 
selectively based on an individual patient’s specifi c benefi t/risk 
assessment, as determined by specifi c tissue signatures and reli-
able biomarkers, and will probably be adjusted throughout the 
course of their treatment. We will certainly expand our medical 
treatment war chest and uncover eff ective biologics with diff erent 
mechanisms of action to treat our patients. If the initial biologic 
drug fails, patients will be able to switch to another agent and even 
combination biologics may become a reality.
 NOVEL AGENTS
 Th ere are currently numerous novel agents in various phases of 
development being investigated for their ability to eff ectively treat 
patients with CD. Th ere is an unmet need for the treatment of 
patients with CD. Approximately one-third of patients who are 
anti-TNF naive have a primary nonresponse to anti-TNF therapy. 
Among patients who are initial anti-TNF therapy responders, 
approximately one-third subsequently lose their response to ther-
apy or become intolerant to therapy (secondary nonresponders). 
Th ese secondary nonresponders can either escalate dose of their 
current medication, switch to another anti-TNF agent, or switch 
out of class (to an anti-integrin (natalizumab or vedolizumab), 
anti-IL-12 / 23 (ustekinumab), or to a novel mechanism. Th ose 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
29
individuals who switch to therapy within class have less benefi t 
than individuals who are TNF naive.
 Some of the other agents under diff erent stages of development 
for the treatment of patients with CD include other anti-integrins 
such as etrolizumab (which is a dual action anti-integrin that 
inhibits both α 4β 7 and α Eβ 7) or ozanimod (a potent sphingosine-
1-phosphate receptor modulator that inhibits the egress of lympho-
cytes from lymph nodes) ( 370,371 ). Several other agents in early 
phases of development include the anti-IL-23 agents, risankizumab 
( 372 ) and brazikumab ( 373 ), and the selective Janus kinase-1 inhibi-
tors, fi lgotinib ( 374 ) and upadacitinib (formerly ABT-494) ( 375 ).
 CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 Guarantor of the article : Gary R. Lichtenstein, MD, FACG.
 Specifi c author contributions : Gary R. Lichtenstein, Edward V. 
Loft us, Jr, Kim L. Isaacs, Miguel D. Regueiro, Lauren B. Gerson, and 
Bruce E. Sands: planning the paper, collecting and interpreting data, 
and draft ing the manuscript. Approved the fi nal draft  submitted. 
Lauren B. Gerson performed the Grade analysis. She did not approve 
the fi nal draft  submitted as she passed away before approval.
 Financial support : Th e American College of Gastroenterology sup-
ported creation of this guideline.
 Potential competing interests : Dr. Lichtenstein has served as a 
consultant or received funds for CME programs from AbbVie, Act-
avis, Alaven, CellCeutrix, Celgene, Ferring, Gilead, Hospira, Janssen 
Orthobiotech, Ironwood, Luitpold/American Regent, Merck, Pfi zer, 
Prometheus Laboratories, Romark, Salix Pharmaceuticals/Valeant, 
Santarus/Receptos/Celgene, Shire Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, UCB. 
He has received research funding from Celgene, Janssen Ortho-
biotech, Takeda, Salix Pharmaceuticals/Valeant Pharmaceuticals, 
Santarus/Receptos/Celgene, Shire Pharmaceuticals. He has served 
as an editor and received honorarium for Gastro-Hep Communica-
tions, McMahon Publishing, Springer Science, and Business Media 
and Up-To-Date. He has received book royalty from SLACK. He 
has received support for IBD fellowship training from: Janssen 
Orthobiotech, Takeda, and Pfi zer. Dr. Loft us has received research 
support from Janssen, Takeda, UCB, AbbVie, Pfi zer, Amgen, 
Genentech, Receptos, Gilead, Celgene, Seres Th erapeutics, MedIm-
mune, Allergan, and Robarts Clinical Trials. He has consulted for 
Janssen, Takeda, UCB, AbbVie, Pfi zer, Amgen, Eli Lilly, Celgene, 
Celltrion Healthcare, and Napo Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Sands has 
been a consultant and received research grants from Pfi zer, AbbVie, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Celgene, Janssen, MedImmune, Prometheus 
Laboratories, and Takeda, has been a consultant for Akros Pharma, 
Allergan, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Forest Research Institute, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Forward Pharma, Immune Pharmaceuticals, 
Lilly, Luitpold Pharmaceuticals, Receptos, Salix Pharmaceuticals, 
Syngergy Pharmaceuticals, Th eravance Biopharma R&D, TiGenix, 
TopiVert Pharma, UCB, and Vedanta Biosciences, and has received 
honoraria for speaking in a CME program from the American Col-
lege of Gastroenterology. Dr. Regueiro has received research support 
from Janssen, Abbvie, and Takeda, and has served as a consultant 
and was on advisory boards for Amgen, AbbVie, Janssen, Takeda, 
Pfi zer, UCB, Celgene, and Miraca. Dr. Isaacs has received research 
support from Janssen, Takeda, UCB, Abbvie, Roche, Eli Lily, and 
Celgene. She has received support for IBD fellowship training from 
Takeda, Abbvie, and Pfi zer. She is part of DSMB for Medimmune 
and Janssen. Dr. Gerson declares no confl ict of interest.
 REFERENCES 
1. 
 Guyatt  G ,  Oxman  A ,  Vist  G et al.  GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating 
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations .  BMJ  2008 ; 336 : 924 – 6 . 
2. 
 Sands  B. .  From symptom to diagnosis: clinical distinctions among various 
forms of intestinal infl ammation .  Gastroenterology  2004 ; 126 : 1518 – 32 . 
3. 
 Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Loft us  EJ ,  Colombel  J et al.  Long-term complications, 
extraintestinal manifestations, and mortality in adult Crohn's disease in 
population-based cohorts .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2011 ; 17 : 471 – 8 . 
4. 
 Pariente  B ,  Cosnes  J ,  Danese  S et al.  Development of the Crohn's disease diges-
tive damage score, the Lemann score .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2011 ; 17 : 1415 – 22 . 
5. 
 Pariente  B ,  Mary  J ,  Danese  S et al.  Development of the Lemann index to 
assess digestive tract damage in patients with Crohn’s disease .  Gastroen-
terology  2015 ; 148 : 52 – 63 
6. 
 Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Harmsen  WS ,  Tremaine  WJ et al.  Cumulative length 
of bowel resection in a population-based cohort of patients with Crohn's 
disease .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2016 ; 14 : 1439 – 44 . 
7. 
 Panaccione  R ,  Sandborn  W ,  Loft us  EJ .  Phenotypic classifi cation of Crohn’s 
disease patients in Olmsted County, Minnesota: application of the Vienna 
classifi cation (abstract) .  Gastroenterology  1999 ; 116 : A810 . 
8. 
 Henriksen  M ,  Jahnsen  J ,  Lygren  I et al.  Clinical course in Crohn's disease: 
results of a fi ve-year population-based follow-up study (the IBSEN study) . 
 Scand J Gastroenterol  2007 ; 42 : 602 – 10 . 
9. 
 Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Loft us  EV Jr ,  Colombel  JF et al.  Th e natural history of 
adult Crohn's disease in population-based cohorts .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2010 ; 105 : 289 – 97 . 
10.  Th ia  KT ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Harmsen  WS et al.  Risk factors associated with 
progression to intestinal complications of Crohn's disease in a popula-
tion-based cohort .  Gastroenterology  2010 ; 139 : 1147 – 55 . 
11.  Duricova  D ,  Fumery  M ,  Annese  V et al.  Th e natural history of Crohn's 
disease in children: a review of population-based studies .  Eur J Gastroen-
terol Hepatol  2017 ; 29 : 125 – 34 . 
12.  Torres  J ,  Caprioli  F ,  Katsanos  KH et al.  Predicting outcomes to optimize 
disease management in infl ammatory bowel diseases .  J Crohns Colitis 
 2016 ; 10 : 1385 – 94 . 
13.  Van Der Sloot  KW ,  Joshi  AD ,  Bellavance  DR et al.  Visceral adiposity, 
genetic susceptibility, and risk of complications among individuals with 
Crohn's disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2017 ; 23 : 82 – 8 . 
14.  Schwartz  DA ,  Loft us  EV Jr ,  Tremaine  WJ et al.  Th e natural history of 
fi stulizing Crohn's disease in Olmsted County, Minnesota .  Gastroenterol-
ogy  2002 ; 122 : 875 – 80 . 
15.  Ingle  S ,  Loft us  E ,  Harmsen  WS .  Hospitalization rates for Crohn's disease 
patients in Olmsted county, Minnesota in the pre-biologic era (abstract) . 
 Am J Gastroenterol  2007 ; 102 : S487 . 
16.  Silverstein  MD ,  Loft us  EV ,  Sandborn  WJ et al.  Clinical course and costs 
of care for Crohn's disease: Markov model analysis of a population-based 
cohort .  Gastroenterology  1999 ; 117 : 49 – 57 
17.  Munkholm  P ,  Langholz  E ,  Davidsen  M et al.  Disease activity courses 
in a regional cohort of Crohn's disease patients .  Scand J Gastroenterol 
 1995 ; 30 : 699 – 706 
18.  Munkholm  P ,  Langholz  E ,  Davidsen  M et al.  Frequency of glucocorticoid 
resistance and dependency in Crohn's disease .  Gut  1994 ; 35 : 360 – 2 . 
19.  Faubion  WA Jr. ,  Loft us  EV Jr ,  Harmsen  WS et al.  Th e natural history of 
corticosteroid therapy for infl ammatory bowel disease: a population-
based study .  Gastroenterology  2001 ; 121 : 255 – 60 . 
20.  Frolkis  AD ,  Dykeman  J ,  Negron  ME et al.  Risk of surgery for infl ammatory 
bowel diseases has decreased over time: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of population-based studies .  Gastroenterology  2013 ; 145 : 996 – 1006 . 
21.  Frolkis  AD ,  Lipton  DS ,  Fiest  KM et al.  Cumulative incidence of second 
intestinal resection in Crohn's disease: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of population-based studies .  Am J Gastroenterol  2014 ; 109 : 1739 – 48 . 
22.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Loft us  E ,  Harmsen  W et al.  Postoperative recurrence of 
Crohn’s disease in a population-based cohort (abstract). .  Gastroenterology 
 2010 ; 138 ( 5 Suppl 1 ): S198 – S199 . 
23.  De Cruz  P ,  Kamm  MA ,  Prideaux  L et al.  Postoperative recurrent luminal 
Crohn's disease: a systematic review .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2012 ; 18 : 758 – 77 . 
24.  Canavan  C ,  Abrams  KR ,  Mayberry  JF. .  Meta-analysis: mortality in 
Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2007 ; 25 : 861 – 70 . 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
30
25.  Bewtra  M ,  Kaiser  LM ,  TenHave  T et al.  Crohn's disease and ulcerative 
colitis are associated with elevated standardized mortality ratios: a meta-
analysis .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2013 ; 19 : 599 – 613 
26.  Lewis  JD ,  Gelfand  JM ,  Troxel  AB et al.  Immunosuppressant medica-
tions and mortality in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2008 ; 103 : 1428 – 35 . quiz 1436  
27.  Lichtenstein  GR ,  Feagan  BG ,  Cohen  RD et al.  Serious infection and 
mortality in patients with Crohn's disease: more than 5 years of follow-up 
in the TREAT registry .  Am J Gastroenterol  2012 ; 107 : 1409 – 22 . 
28.  Canavan  C ,  Abrams  KR ,  Mayberry  J. .  Meta-analysis: colorectal and small 
bowel cancer risk in patients with Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2006 ; 23 : 1097 – 104 . 
29.  Laukoetter  MG ,  Mennigen  R ,  Hannig  CM et al.  Intestinal cancer risk in 
Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis .  J Gastrointest Surg  2011 ; 15 : 576 – 83 . 
30.  Lennard-Jones  J ,  Shivananda  S. .  Clinical uniformity of infl ammatory 
bowel disease a presentation and during the fi rst year of disease in the 
north and south of Europe. EC-IBD Study Group .  Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol  1997 ; 9 : 353 – 9 . 
31.  Reinisch  S ,  Schweiger  K ,  Pablik  E et al.  An index with improved diag-
nostic accuracy for the diagnosis of Crohn's disease derived from the 
Lennard-Jones criteria .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2016 ; 44 : 601 – 11 . 
32.  Gasche  C ,  Lomer  M ,  Cavill  I et al.  Iron, anaemia, and infl ammatory 
bowel diseases .  Gut  2004 ; 53 : 1190 – 7 . 
33.  Voudoukis  E ,  Karmiris  K ,  Oustamanolakis  P et al.  Association between 
thrombocytosis and iron defi ciency anemia in infl ammatory bowel dis-
ease .  Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol  2013 ; 25 : 1212 – 6 . 
34.  Magro  F ,  Sousa  P ,  Ministro  P. .  C-reactive protein in Crohn's disease: how 
informative is it?  Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol  2014 ; 8 : 392 – 408 
35.  Vermeire  S ,  Van Assche  G ,  Rutgeerts  P. .  C-reactive protein as a marker for 
infl ammatory bowel disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2004 ; 10 : 661 – 5 . 
36.  Menees  S ,  Powell  C ,  Kurlander  J et al.  A meta-analysis of the utility of 
C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, fecal calprotectin, and 
fecal lactoferrin to exclude infl ammatory bowel disease in adults with IBS . 
 Am J Gastroenterol  2015 ; 110 : 444 – 54 . 
37.  Turner  D ,  Mack  D ,  Hyams  J et al.  C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) or both? A systematic evaluation in pediatric 
ulcerative colitis .  J Crohns Colitis  2011 ; 5 : 423 – 9 . 
38.  Chang  M ,  Chou  J ,  Chen  S et al.  Faecal calprotectin as a novel biomarker 
for diff erentiating between infl ammatory bowel disease and irritable 
bowel syndrome .  Mol Med Rep  2014 ; 10 : 522 – 6 . 
39.  Menees  SB ,  Powell  C ,  Kurlander  J et al.  A meta-analysis of the utility of 
C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, fecal calprotectin, and 
fecal lactoferrin to exclude infl ammatory bowel disease in adults with IBS . 
 Am J Gastroenterol  2015 ; 110 : 444 – 54 . 
40.  Kennedy  NA ,  Clark  A ,  Walkden  A et al.  Clinical utility and diagnostic 
accuracy of faecal calprotectin for IBD at fi rst presentation to gastroenter-
ology services in adults aged 16-50 years .  J Crohns Colitis  2015 ; 9 : 41 – 9 . 
41.  Yang  Z ,  Clark  N ,  Park  KT. .  Eff ectiveness and cost-eff ectiveness of measur-
ing fecal calprotectin in diagnosis of infl ammatory bowel disease in adults 
and children .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2014 ; 12 : 253 – 262.e2 . 
42.  Henderson  P ,  Casey  A ,  Lawrence  SJ et al.  Th e diagnostic accuracy of fecal 
calprotectin during the investigation of suspected pediatric infl ammatory 
bowel disease .  Am J Gastroenterol  2012 ; 107 : 941 – 9 . 
43.  Liu  J ,  van Sommeren  S ,  Huang  H et al.  Association analyses identify 38 
susceptibility loci for infl ammatory bowel disease and highlight shared 
genetic risk across populations .  Nat Genet  2015 ; 47 : 979 – 86 . 
44.  Franke  A ,  McGovern  DPB ,  Barrett  JC et al.  Meta-analysis increases to 
71 the tally of confi rmed Crohn's disease susceptibility loci .  Nat Genet 
 2010 ; 42 : 1118 – 25 . 
45.  Lee  H ,  Oh  H ,  Yang  S et al.  X chromosome-wide association study identi-
fi es a susceptibility locus for infl ammatory bowel disease in Koreans .  J 
Crohns Colitis  2017 ; 11 : 820 – 30 . 
46.  Roberts  RL ,  Gearry  RB ,  Hollis-Moff att  JE et al.  IL23R R381Q and 
ATG16L1 T300A are strongly associated with crohn's disease in a study of 
New Zealand Caucasians with infl ammatory bowel disease .  Am J Gastro-
enterol  2007 ; 102 : 2754 – 61 . 
47.  Tsianos  E ,  Katsanos  K ,  Tsianos  V. .  Role of genetics in the diagnosis and 
prognosis of Crohn's disease .  World J Gastroenterol  2012 ; 18 : 105 – 18 . 
48.  Cleynen  I ,  GonzÃ¡lez  J ,  Figueroa  C et al.  Genetic factors conferring 
an increased susceptibility to develop Crohn's disease also infl uence 
disease phenotype: results from the IBDchip European Project .  Gut 
 2013 ; 62 : 1556 – 65 . 
49.  Connelly  TM ,  Berg  A ,  Harris  L et al.  Genetic determinants associated 
with early age of diagnosis of IBD .  Dis Colon Rectum  2014 ; 58 : 321 – 7 . 
50.  Dubinsky  MC ,  Kugathasan  S ,  Kwon  S et al.  Multi-dimensional prognos-
tic risk assessment identifi es association between IL12B variation and 
surgery in Crohn’s disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2013 ; 19 : 1662 – 70 . 
51.  Liu  Z ,  Shen  B. .  Overcoming diffi  culty in diagnosis and diff erential diag-
nosis of Crohn's disease: the potential role of serological and genetic tests . 
 Expert Rev Mol Diagn  2015 ; 15 : 1133 – 41 . 
52.  Mitsuyama  K ,  Niwa  M ,  Takedatsu  H et al.  Antibody markers in the diagno-
sis of infl ammatory bowel disease .  World J Gastroenterol  2016 ; 22 : 1304 – 10 . 
53.  Coremans  G ,  Rutgeerts  P ,  Geboes  K et al.  Th e value of ileoscopy with 
biopsy in the diagnosis of intestinal Crohn's disease .  Gastrointest Endosc 
 1984 ; 30 : 167 – 72 . 
54.  Byrne  M ,  Power  D ,  Keeling  A et al.  Combined terminal ileoscopy and 
biopsy is superior to small bowel follow-through in detecting terminal 
ileal pathology .  Dig Liv Dis  2004 ; 36 : 147 – 52 . 
55.  Geboes  K ,  Ectors  N ,  D'Haens  G et al.  Is ileoscopy with biopsy worthwhile 
in patients presenting with symptoms of infl ammatory bowel disease . 
 Am J Gastroenterol  1998 ; 93 : 201 – 6 . 
56.  Mary  J ,  Modigliani  R. .  Development and validation of an endoscopic 
index of the severity for Crohn's disease: a prospective multicentre study . 
 Gut  1989 ; 30 : 983 – 9 . 
57.  Daperno  M ,  D'Haens  G ,  Van Assche  G et al.  Development and validation 
of a new, simplifi ed endoscopic activity score for Crohn's disease: the 
SES-CD .  Gastrointest Endosc  2004 ; 60 : 505 – 12 . 
58.  Khanna  R ,  Zou  G ,  D'Haens  G et al.  Reliability among central readers in 
the evaluation of endoscopic fi ndings from patients with Crohn's disease . 
 Gut  2016 ; 65 : 1119 – 25 . 
59.  Rutgeerts  P ,  Onette  E ,  Vantrappen  G et al.  Crohn's disease of the stomach 
and duodenum: a clinical study with emphasis on the value of endoscopy 
and endoscopic biopsies .  Endoscopy  1980 ; 12 : 288 – 94 . 
60.  Annunziata  M ,  Caviglia  R ,  Papparella  L et al.  Upper gastrointestinal 
involvement of Crohn's disease: a prospective study on the role of upper 
endoscopy in the diagnostic work-up .  Dig Dis Sci  2012 ; 57 : 1618 – 23 . 
61.  Lenaerts  C ,  Roy  C ,  Vaillancourt  M et al.  High incidence of upper gastro-
intestinal tract involvement in children with Crohn disease .  Pediatrics 
 1989 ; 83 : 777 – 81 . 
62.  Turner  D ,  Griffi  ths  A. .  Esophageal, gastric and duodenal manifestationf of 
IBD and the role of upper endoscopy in IBD diagnosis .  Curr Gastroen-
terol Rep  2009 ; 11 : 234 – 7 . 
63.  Danzi  J ,  Farmer  R ,  Sullivan  B et al.  Endoscopic features of gastroduodenal 
Crohn's disease .  Gastroenterology  1976 ; 70 : 9 – 13 . 
64.  Dionisio  P ,  Gurudu  S ,  Leighton  J et al.  Capsule endoscopy has a signifi cantly 
higher diagnostic yield in patients with suspected and established small-bow-
el Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol  2010 ; 105 : 1240 – 8 . 
65.  Solem  C ,  Loft us  EJ ,  Fletcher  J et al.  Small-bowel imaging in Crohn's dis-
ease: a prospective, blinded, 4-way comparison trial .  Gastrointest Endosc 
 2008 ; 68 : 255 – 66 . 
66.  Monteiro  S ,  Boal Carvalho  P ,  Dias de Castro  F et al.  Capsule endoscopy: 
diagnostic accuracy of Lewis score in patients with suspected Crohn's 
disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2015 ; 21 : 2241 – 6 . 
67.  Hall  B ,  Holleran  G ,  Costigan  D et al.  Capsule endoscopy: high negative 
predictive value in the long term despite a low diagnostic yield in patients 
with suspected Crohn's disease .  United European Gastroenterology J 
 2013 ; 1 : 461 – 8 . 
68.  Park  S ,  Ye  B ,  Kim  K et al.  Guidelines for video capsule endoscopy: empha-
sis on Crohn's disease .  Clin Endosc  2015 ; 48 : 128 – 35 . 
69.  Spada  C ,  Shah  S ,  Riccioni  M et al.  Video capsule endoscopy in patients 
with known or suspected small bowel stricture previously tested with the 
dissolving patency capsule .  J Clin Gastroenterol  2007 ; 41 : 576 – 82 . 
70.  Rozendorn  N ,  Klang  E ,  Lahat  A et al.  Prediction of patency capsule 
retention in known crohn's disease patients by using magnetic resonance 
imaging .  Gastrointest Endosc  2015 ; 110 : 1316 – 23 . 
71.  Nemeth  A ,  Kopylov  U ,  Koulaouzidis  A et al.  Use of patency capsule in 
patients with established Crohn’s disease .  Endoscopy  2016 ; 48 : 373 – 9 . 
72.  Tontini  G ,  Vecchi  M ,  Neurath  M et al.  Advanced endoscopic imaging 
techniques in Crohn's disease .  J Crohns Colitis  2014 ; 8 : 261 – 9 . 
73.  Schulz  C ,  Mönkemüller  K ,  Salheiser  M et al.  Double-balloon enteroscopy 
in the diagnosis of suspected isolated Crohn's disease of the small bowel . 
 Dig Endosc  2014 ; 26 : 236 – 42 . 
74.  Navaneethan  U ,  Vargo  J ,  Menon  K et al.  Impact of balloon-assisted ent-
eroscopy on the diagnosis and management of suspected and established 
small-bowel Crohn’s disease .  Endosc Int Open  2014 ; 2 : E201 – E206 . 
75.  Jang  H ,  Choi  M ,  Eun  C et al.  Clinical usefulness of double balloon 
enteroscopy in suspected Crohn's disease: the KASID multi-center trial . 
 Hepatogastroenterology  2014 ; 61 : 1292 – 6 . 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
31
76.  Rahman  A ,  Ross  A ,  Leighton  J et al.  Double-balloon enteroscopy in 
Crohn's disease: fi ndings and impact on management in a multicenter 
retrospective study .  Gastrointest Endosc  2015 ; 82 : 102 – 7 . 
77.  Seiderer  J ,  Herrmann  K ,  Diepolder  H et al.  Double-balloon enteroscopy 
versus magnetic resonance enteroclysis in diagnosing suspected small-
bowel Crohn's disease: results of a pilot study .  Scand J Gastroenterol 
 2007 ; 42 : 1376 – 85 . 
78.  Kiesslich  R ,  Neurath  M. .  Surveillance colonoscopy in ulcerative colitis: 
magnifying chromoendoscopy in the spotlight .  Gut  2004 ; 53 : 165 – 7 . 
79.  Subramanian  V ,  Mannath  J ,  Ragunath  K et al.  Meta-analysis: the diagnostic 
yield of chromoendoscopy for detecting dysplasia in patients with colonic 
infl ammatory bowel disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2011 ; 33 : 304 – 12 . 
80.  Iacucci  M ,  Kaplan  G ,  Panaccione  R et al.  A randomized trial comparing 
high defi nition colonoscopy alone with high defi nition dye spraying and 
electronic virtual chromoendoscopy for detection of colonic neoplas-
tic lesions during IBD surveillance colonoscopy .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2018 ; 113 : 225 – 34 . 
81.  N  Mohammed ,  P  Kant ,  Abid  F et al.  High defi nition white light endos-
copy (Hdwle) versus high defi nition with chromoendoscopy (Hdce) in 
the detection of dysplasia in long standing ulcerative colitis: a randomized 
controlled trial (abstract) .  Gastrointest Endosc  2015 ; 81 : AB148 . 
82.  Iannone  A ,  Ruospo  M ,  Wong  G et al.  Chromoendoscopy for surveillance 
in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease: a systematic review of rando-
mized trials .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2017 ; 15 ( 1684-1697 ): e11 . 
83.  Iannone  A ,  Ruospo  M ,  Wong  G et al.  Chromoendoscopy for surveillance 
in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease: a systematic review of rand-
omized trials .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2016 ; 15 : 1684 – 97 . 
84.  Pellise  M ,  Lopez-Ceron  M ,  Rodriguez de Miguel  C et al.  Narrow-band 
imaging as an alternative to chromoendoscopy for the detection of 
dysplasia in long-standing infl ammatory bowel disease: a prospective, 
randomized, crossover study .  Gastrointest Endosc  2011 ; 74 : 840 – 8 . 
85.  Ignjatovic  A ,  East  JE ,  Subramanian  V et al.  Narrow band imaging for 
detection of dysplasia in colitis: a randomized controlled trial .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  2012 ; 107 : 885 – 90 . 
86.  Marion  JF ,  Waye  JD ,  Israel  Y et al.  Chromoendoscopy is more eff ective than 
standard colonoscopy in detecting dysplasia during long-term surveillance 
of patients with colitis .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2016 ; 14 : 713 – 9 . 
87.  Gasia  MF ,  Ghosh  S ,  Panaccione  R et al.  Targeted biopsies identify larger 
proportions of patients with colonic neoplasia undergoing high-defi nition 
colonoscopy, dye chromoendoscopy, or electronic virtual chromoendos-
copy .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2016 ; 14 : 704 – 712.e4 . 
88.  Laine  L ,  Kaltenbach  T ,  Barkun  A et al.  SCENIC international consensus 
statement on surveillance and management of dysplasia in infl ammatory 
bowel disease .  Gastroenterology  2015 ; 148 : 639 – 51 . e28 . 
89.  Mooiweer  E ,  van der Meulen-de Jong  AE ,  Ponsioen  CY et al.  Chromoen-
doscopy for surveillance in infl ammatory bowel disease does not increase 
neoplasia detection compared with conventional colonoscopy with ran-
dom biopsies: results from a large retrospective study .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2015 ; 110 : 1014 – 21 . 
90.  Moussata  D ,  Allez  M ,  Cazals-Hatem  D et al.  Are random biopsies still useful 
for the detection of neoplasia in patients with IBD undergoing surveillance 
colonoscopy with chromoendoscopy?  Gut ;  advance online publication, 23 
January 2017; pii: gutjnl-2016-311892; doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-311892 . 
91.  Carballal  S ,  Maisterra  S ,  Lopez-Serrano  A et al.  Real-life chromoendo-
scopy for neoplasia detection and characterisation in long-standing IBD . 
 Gut  2018 ; 67 : 70 – 8 . 
92.  Samuel  S ,  Bruining  D ,  Loft us  E Jr et al.  Endoscopic skipping of the distal 
terminal ileum in Crohn's disease can lead to negative results from 
ileocolonoscopy .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2012 ; 10 : 1253 – 9 . 
93.  Siddiki  H ,  Fidler  J ,  Fletcher  J et al.  Prospective comparison of state-of-
the-art MR enterography and CT enterography in small-bowel Crohn's 
disease .  AJR Am J Roentgenol  2009 ; 193 : 113 – 21 . 
94.  Buchman  A ,  Miller  F ,  Wallin  A et al.  Videocapsule endoscopy versus 
barium contrast studies for the diagnosis of Crohn's disease recurrence 
involving the small intestine .  Am J Gastroenterol  2004 ; 99 : 2171 – 7 . 
95.  Adler  J ,  Punglia  D ,  Dillman  J et al.  Computed tomography enterography 
fi ndings correlate with tissue infl ammation, not fi brosis in resected small 
bowel Crohn's disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2012 ; 18 : 849 – 56 . 
96. 
 Church  P ,  Turner  D ,  Feldman  B et al.  Systematic review with meta-analysis: 
magnetic resonance enterography signs for the detection of infl ammation and 
intestinal damage in Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2015 ; 41 : 153 – 66 . 
97.  Bruining  D ,  Bhatnagar  G ,  Rimola  J et al.  CT and MR enterography 
in Crohn's disease: current and future applications .  Abdom Imaging 
 2015 ; 40 : 965 – 74 . 
98.  Deepak  P ,  Fletcher  J ,  Fidler  J et al.  Radiological response is associated 
with better long-term outcomes and is a potential treatment target 
in patients with small bowel Crohn's disease .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2016 ; 111 : 997 – 1006 . 
99.  Desmond  A ,  O'Regan  K ,  Curran  C et al.  Crohn's disease: factors associated 
with exposure to high levels of diagnostic radiation .  Gut  2008 ; 57 : 1524 – 9 . 
100.  Chatu  S ,  Subramanian  V ,  Pollok  R. .  Meta-analysis: diagnostic medical 
radiation exposure in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2012 ; 35 : 529 – 39 . 
101.  Silva  A ,  HJ  L ,  Hara  A et al.  Innovations in CT dose reduction strategy: 
application of the adaptive statistical iterative reconstruction algorithm . 
 AJR Am J Roentgenol  2010 ; 194 : 191 – 9 . 
102.  Wise  P ,  Schwartz  D. .  Th e evaluation and treatment of Crohn perianal 
fi stulae: EUA, EUS, MRI and other imaging modalities .  Gastroenterol 
Clin N Am  2012 ; 41 : 379 – 91 . 
103.  Schwartz  D ,  Wiersema  M ,  Dudiak  K et al.  A comparison of endoscopic 
ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and exam under anesthesia for 
evaluation of Crohn's perianal fi stulas .  Gastroenterology  2001 ; 121 : 1064 – 72 . 
104.  Schwartz  D ,  White  C ,  Wise  P et al.  Use of endoscopic ultrasound to guide 
combination medical and surgical therapy for patients with Crohn's 
perianal fi stulas .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2005 ; 11 : 727 – 32 . 
105.  Spradlin  N ,  Wise  P ,  Herline  A et al.  A randomized prospective trial of 
endoscopic ultrasound to guide combination medical and surgical treat-
ment for Crohn's perianal fi stulas .  Am J Gastroenterol  2008 ; 103 : 2527 – 35 . 
106.  Villa  C ,  Pompili  G ,  Franceschelli  G et al.  Role of magnetic resonance 
imaging in evaluation of the activity of perianal Crohn's disease .  Eur J 
Radiol  2012 ; 81 : 616 – 22 . 
107.  Seastedt  K ,  Trencheva  K ,  Michelassi  F et al.  Accuracy of CT enterography 
and magnetic resonance enterography imaging to detect lesions preop-
eratively in patients undergoing surgery for Crohn's disease .  Dis Colon 
Rectum  2014 ; 57 : 1364 – 70 . 
108.  Xie  Y ,  Zhu  W ,  Li  N et al.  Th e outcome of initial percutaneous drainage 
versus surgical drainage for intra-abdominal abscesses in Crohn's disease . 
 Int J Colorectal Dis  2012 ; 27 : 199 – 206 
109.  Melmed  G ,  Siegel  C. .  Quality improvement in infl ammatory bowel 
disease .  Gastroenterol Hepatol  2013 ; 9 : 286 – 92 . 
110.  Williet  N ,  Sandborn  W ,  Peyrin-Biroulet  L. .  Patient-reported outcomes as 
primary end points in clinical trials of infl ammatory bowel disease .  Clin 
Gastro Hep  2014 ; 12 : 1246 – 56 . 
111.  Sauter  B ,  Beglinger  C ,  Girardin  M et al.  Monitoring disease activity and 
progression in Crohn's disease. A Swiss perspective on the IBD ahead 
'optimised monitoring' recommendations .  Digestion  2014 ; 89 : 299 – 309 
112.  Van Assche  G ,  Dignass  A ,  Panes  J et al.  Th e second European evidence-
based consensus on the diagnosis and management of Crohn's disease: 
defi nitions and diagnosis .  J Crohns Colitis  2010 ; 4 : 7 – 27 . 
113.  Silverberg  MS ,  Satsangi  J ,  Ahmad  T et al.  Toward an integrated clinical, 
molecular and serological classifi cation of infl ammatory bowel disease: 
report of a Working Party of the 2005 Montreal World Congress of Gas-
troenterology .  Can J Gastroenterol  2005 ; 19 ( (Suppl A) ): 5a – 36a . 
114.  Satsangi  J ,  Silverberg  M ,  Vermeire  S et al.  Th e Montreal classifi cation of 
infl ammatory bowel disease: controversies, consensus, and implications . 
 Gut  2006 ; 55 : 749 – 53 . 
115.  Levine  A ,  Griffi  ths  A ,  Markowitz  J et al.  Pediatric modifi cation of the 
Montreal classifi cation for infl ammatory bowel disease: the Paris clas-
sifi cation .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2011 ; 17 : 1314 – 21 . 
116.  Sandborn  W ,  Hanauer  S ,  Van Assche  G et al.  Treating beyond symptoms 
with a view to improving patient outcomes in infl ammatory bowel dis-
eases .  J Crohns Colitis  2014 ; 8 : 927 – 35 . 
117.  Zallot  C ,  Peyrin-Biroulet  L. .  Deep remission in infl ammatory bowel dis-
ease: looking beyond symptoms .  Current Gastroenterol Rep  2013 ; 15 : 1 – 7 . 
118.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  WJ  S ,  Sands  B et al.  Selecting therapeutic targets in 
infl ammatory bowel disease (STRIDE): determining therapeutic goals for 
treat-to-target .  Am J Gastroenterol  2015 ; 110 : 1324 – 8 . 
119.  Klimczak  K ,  Lykowska-Szuber  L ,  Eder  P et al.  Th e diagnostic usefulness 
of fecal lactoferrin in the assessment of Crohn's disease activity .  Eur J 
Intern Med  2015 ; 26 : 623 – 7 . 
120.  Schoepfer  A ,  Beglinger  C ,  Straumann  A et al.  Fecal calprotectin correlates 
more closely with the Simple Endoscopic Score for Crohn's disease 
(SES-CD) than CRP, blood leukocytes, and the CDAI .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2010 ; 105 : 162 – 9 . 
121.  Boschetti  G ,  Laidet  M ,  Moussata  D et al.  Levels of fecal calprotectin 
are associated with the severity of postoperative endoscopic recurrence 
in asymptomatic patients with Crohn's disease .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2015 ; 110 : 865 – 72 . 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
32
122.  Wright  E ,  Kamm  M ,  De Cruz  P et al.  Measurement of fecal calprotectin 
improves monitoring and detection of recurrence of Crohn's disease aft er 
surgery .  Gastroenterology  2015 ; 148 : 938 – 47 . 
123.  Ferreiro-Iglesias  R ,  Barreiro-de Acosta  M ,  Otero Santiago  M et al.  Fecal 
calprotectin as predictor of relapse in patients with infl ammatory bowel 
disease under maintenance infl iximab therapy .  J Clin Gastroenterol 
 2016 ; 50 : 147 – 51 . 
124.  Molander  P ,  Färkkilä  M ,  Ristimäki  A et al.  Does fecal calprotectin predict 
short-term relapse aft er stopping TNFα -blocking agents in infl ammatory 
bowel disease patients in deep remission .  J Crohns Colitis  2015 ; 9 : 33 – 40 
125.  Magro  F ,  Rodrigues-Pinto  E ,  Santos-Antunes  J et al.  High C-reactive 
protein in Crohn's disease patients predicts nonresponse to infl iximab 
treatment .  J Crohns Colitis  2014 ; 8 : 129 – 36 . 
126.  Reinisch  W ,  Wang  Y ,  Oddens  B et al.  C-reactive protein, an indicator for 
maintained response or remission to infl iximab in patients with Crohn's 
disease: a post-hoc analysis from ACCENT I .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er 
 2012 ; 35 : 568 – 76 . 
127.  Gallego  J ,  Echarri  A ,  Porta  A et al.  Ileal Crohn's disease: MRI with endo-
scopic correlation .  Eur J Radiol  2011 ; 80 : e8 – 12 . 
128.  Takenaka  K ,  Ohtsuka  K ,  Kitazume  Y et al.  Correlation of the endoscopic 
and magnetic resonance scoring systems in the deep small intestine in 
Crohn's disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2015 ; 21 : 1832 – 8 . 
129.  Tielbeek  J ,  Löwenberg  M ,  Bipat  S et al.  Serial magnetic resonance imaging 
for monitoring medical therapy eff ects in Crohn's disease .  Infl amm Bowel 
Dis  2013 ; 19 : 1943 – 50 . 
130.  Daperno  M ,  Castiglione  F ,  de Ridder  L et al.  Results of the 2nd part 
Scientifi c Workshop of the ECCO. II: Measures and markers of prediction 
to achieve, detect, and monitor intestinal healing in infl ammatory bowel 
disease .  J Crohns Colitis  2011 ; 5 : 484 – 98 . 
131.  Baert  F ,  Moortgat  L ,  Van Assche  G et al.  Mucosal healing predicts 
sustained clinical remission in patients with early-stage Crohn's disease . 
 Gastroenterology  2010 ; 138 : 463 – 8 . 
132.  Frøslie  K ,  Jahnsen  J ,  Moum  B et al.  Mucosal healing in infl ammatory 
bowel disease: results from a Norwegian population-based cohort . 
 Gastroenterology  2007 ; 133 : 412 – 22 . 
133.  Nuti  F ,  Civitelli  F ,  Bloise  S et al.  Prospective evaluation of the achieve-
ment of mucosal healing with anti-TNF-α therapy in a paediatric Crohn's 
disease cohort .  J Crohns Colitis  2016 ; 10 : 5 – 12 . 
134.  Ferrante  M ,  Colombel  J ,  Sandborn  W et al.  Validation of endoscopic ac-
tivity scores in patients with Crohn's disease based on a post hoc analysis 
of data from SONIC .  Gastroenterology  2013 ; 145 : 978 – 86 . 
135.  Yamamoto  T ,  Bamba  T ,  Umegae  S et al.  Th e impact of early endoscopic 
lesions on the clinical course of patients following ileocolonic resection 
for Crohn's disease: a 5-year prospective cohort study .  United European 
Gastroenterology J  2013 ; 1 : 294 – 8 . 
136.  Rutgeerts  P ,  Geboes  K ,  Vantrappen  G et al.  Predictability of the post-
operative course of Crohn's disease .  Gastroenterology  1990 ; 99 : 956 – 63 . 
137.  Singh  S ,  Graff   L ,  Bernstein  C .  Do NSAIDs, antibiotics, infections, or stress 
trigger fl ares in IBD?  Am J Gastroenterol  2008 ; 104 : 1298 – 313 . 
138.  Takeuchi  K ,  Smale  S ,  Premchand  P et al.  Prevalence and mechanism of 
nonsteroidal anti-infl ammatory drug-induced clinical relapse in patients 
with infl ammatory bowel disease .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2006 ; 4 : 
196 – 202 
139.  Evans  J ,  McMahon  A ,  Murray  F et al.  Non-steroidal anti-infl ammatory 
drugs are associated with emergency admission to hospital for colitis due 
to infl ammatory bowel disease .  Gut  1997 ; 40 : 619 – 22 . 
140.  Felder  J ,  Korelitz  B ,  Rajapakse  R et al.  Eff ects of nonsteroidal antiinfl am-
matory drugs on infl ammatory bowel disease: a case-control study .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  2000 ; 95 : 1949 – 54 . 
141.  Bernstein  C ,  Singh  S ,  Graff   L et al.  A prospective population-based 
study of triggers of symptomatic fl ares in IBD .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2010 ; 105 : 1994 – 2002 
142.  Sandborn  W ,  Stenson  W ,  Brynskov  J et al.  Safety of celecoxib in patients 
with ulcerative colitis in remission: a randomized, placebo-controlled, 
pilot study .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2006 ; 4 : 203 – 11 . 
143.  Lunney  P ,  Kariyawasam  V ,  Wang  R et al.  Smoking prevalence and its 
infl uence on disease course and surgery in Crohn's disease and ulcerative 
colitis .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2015 ; 42 : 61 – 70 
144.  Kuenzig  ME ,  Lee  SM ,  Eksteen  B et al.  Smoking infl uences the need for 
surgery in patients with the infl ammatory bowel diseases: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis incorporating disease duration .  BMC Gastroen-
terol  2016 ; 16 : 143 . 
145.  Louis  E ,  Michel  V ,  Hugot  JP et al.  Early development of stricturing or 
penetrating pattern in Crohn's disease is infl uenced by disease location, 
number of fl ares, and smoking but not by NOD2/CARD15 genotype .  Gut 
 2003 ; 52 : 552 – 7 . 
146.  Gisbert  J ,  Marín  A ,  Chaparro  M. .  Systematic review: factors associated 
with relapse of infl ammatory bowel disease aft er discontinuation of 
anti-TNF therapy .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2015 ; 42 : 391 – 405 
147.  Cosnes  J ,  Beaugerie  L ,  Carbonnel  F et al.  Smoking cessation and the 
course of Crohn's disease: an intervention study .  Gastroenterology 
 2001 ; 120 : 1093 – 9 . 
148.  Lewis  J ,  Chen  E ,  Baldassano  R et al.  Infl ammation, antibiotics, and diet 
as environmental stressors of the gut microbiome in pediatric Crohn's 
disease .  Cell Host Microbe  2015 ; 18 : 489 – 500 
149.  Aberra  F ,  Brensinger  C ,  Bilker  W et al.  Antibiotic Use and the Risk 
of Flare of Infl ammatory Bowel Disease .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
 2005 ; 3 : 459 – 65 . 
150.  Rodemann  J ,  Dubberke  E ,  Reske  K et al.  Incidence of Clostridium diffi  cile 
infection in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
 2007 ; 5 : 339 – 44 . 
151.  Monaghan  T ,  Cockayne  A ,  Mahida  Y. .  Pathogenesis of Clostridium 
diffi  cile infection and its potential role in infl ammatory bowel disease . 
 Infl amm Bowel Dis  2015 ; 21 : 1957 – 66 . 
152.  Gaines  L ,  Slaughter  J ,  Horst  S et al.  Association between aff ective-cognitive 
symptoms of depression and exacerbation of Crohn's disease .  Am J Gas-
troenterol  2016 ; 111 : 864 – 70 . 
153.  Goodhand  J ,  Wahed  M ,  Mawdsley  J et al.  Mood disorders in infl amma-
tory bowel disease: relation to diagnosis, disease activity, perceived stress, 
and other factors .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2012 ; 18 : 2301 – 9 . 
154.  Targownik  L ,  Sexton  K ,  Bernstein  M et al.  Th e relationship among per-
ceived stress, symptoms, and infl ammation in persons with infl ammatory 
bowel disease .  Am J Gastroenterol  2015 ; 110 : 1001 – 12 . 
155.  Tabibian  A ,  Tabibian  J ,  Beckman  L et al.  Predictors of health-related qual-
ity of life and adherence in Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis: implica-
tions for clinical management .  Dig Dis Sci  2015 ; 60 : 1366 – 74 . 
156.  Iglesias-Rey  M ,  Barreiro-de Acosta  M ,  Caamaño-Isorna  F et al.  Psycho-
logical factors are associated with changes in the health-related quality of 
life in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2014 ; 20 : 92 – 102 . 
157.  Ananthakrishnan  A ,  Gainer  V ,  Perez  R et al.  Psychiatric co-morbidity 
is associated with increased risk of surgery in Crohn's disease .  Aliment 
Pharmacol Th er  2013 ; 37 : 445 – 54 . 
158.  Szigethy  E ,  Youk  A ,  Gonzalez-Heydrich  J et al.  Eff ect of 2 psychotherapies 
on depression and disease activity in pediatric Crohn's disease .  Infl amm 
Bowel Dis  2015 ; 21 : 1321 – 8 . 
159.  Heron  V ,  Afi f  W. .  Update on therapeutic drug monitoring in Crohn's 
disease .  Gastroenterol Clin North Am  2017 ; 46 : 645 – 59 . 
160.  Vande Casteele  N ,  Herfarth  H ,  Katz  J et al.  American Gastroenterological 
Association Institute Technical Review on the role of therapeutic drug 
monitoring in the management of infl ammatory bowel diseases .  Gastro-
enterology  2017 ; 153 : 835 – 857.e6 . 
161.  Feuerstein  JD ,  Nguyen  GC ,  Kupfer  SS et al.  American Gastroenterological 
Association Institute Guideline on therapeutic drug monitoring in infl am-
matory bowel disease .  Gastroenterology  2017 ; 153 : 827 – 34 . 
162.  Mitrev  N ,  Vande Casteele  N ,  Seow  CH et al.  Review article: consensus 
statements on therapeutic drug monitoring of anti-tumour necrosis 
factor therapy in infl ammatory bowel diseases .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er 
 2017 ; 46 : 1037 – 53 . 
163.  Gomollon  F ,  Dignass  A ,  Annese  V et al.  3rd European Evidence-based 
Consensus on the Diagnosis and Management of Crohn's Disease 2016: 
Part 1: diagnosis and medical management .  J Crohns Colitis  2017 ; 11 : 3 – 25 . 
164.  Lichtenstein  GR ,  Hanauer  SB ,  Sandborn  WJ. .  Management of Crohn's 
disease in adults .  Am J Gastroenterol  2009 ; 104 : 465 – 83 . quiz 464, 484  
165.  Allez  M ,  Lemann  M ,  Bonnet  J et al.  Long term outcome of patients with 
active Crohn's disease exhibiting extensive and deep ulcerations at colo-
noscopy .  Am J Gastroenterol  2002 ; 97 : 947 – 53 . 
166.  Moskovitz  D ,  Daperno  M ,  Van Asshe  GA et al.  Defi ning and validating 
cut-off s for the simple endoscopic score for Crohn's disease (abstract) . 
 Gastroenterology  2007 ; 132 : A173 . 
167.  Bojic  D ,  Bodger  K ,  Travis  S. .  Patient reported outcome measures 
(PROMs) in infl ammatory bowel disease: new data .  J Crohns Colitis 
 2016 ; 11 : S576 – S585 . 
168.  Clinical outcome assessment qualifi cation program submissions .  2016 
cited; Available from  http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApproval-
Process/DrugDevelopmentToolsQualifi cationProgram/ucm450689.htm 
169.  Lichtenstein  G ,  McGovern  D. .  Using markers in IBD to predict disease 
and treatment outcomes: rationale and a review of current status .  Am J 
Gastroenterol Suppl  2016 ; 3 : 17 – 26 . 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
33
170.  Lim  WC ,  Hanauer  S. .  Aminosalicylates for induction of remission or 
response in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2010 ; (12) :
 CD008870 . 
171.  Rijk  MCM ,  Vanhogezand  RA ,  Vanlier  HJJ et al.  Sulfasalazine and 
prednisone compared with sulfasalazine for treating active Crohn 
disease - a double-blind, randomized, multicenter trial .  Ann Intern Med 
 1991 ; 114 : 445 – 50 . 
172.  Singleton  JW ,  Summers  RW ,  Kern  F et al.  Trial of sulfasalazine as adjunc-
tive therapy in Crohn disease .  Gastroenterology  1979 ; 77 : 887 – 97 . 
173.  Steinhart  AH ,  Hemphill  D ,  Greenberg  GR. .  Sulfasalazine and mesalazine 
for the maintenance therapy of Crohn's-disease - a metaanalysis .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  1994 ; 89 : 2116 – 24 . 
174.  Ursing  B ,  Alm  T ,  Barany  F et al.  A comparative study of metronidazole 
and sulfasalazine for active Crohn's disease: the cooperative Crohn's 
disease study in Sweden. II. Result .  Gastroenterology  1982 ; 83 : 550 – 62 . 
175.  Zachos  M ,  Tondeur  M ,  Griffi  ths  AM. .  Enteral nutritional therapy for 
induction of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2007 ; (1) : CD000542 . 
176.  Rieder  F ,  Zimmermann  EM ,  Remzi  FH et al.  Crohn's disease complicated 
by strictures: a systematic review .  Gut  2013 ; 62 : 1072 – 84 . 
177.  Ford  A ,  Kane  S ,  Khan  K et al.  Effi  cacy of 5-aminosalicylates in Crohn's 
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2011 ; 106 : 617 – 29 . 
178.  Hanauer  SB ,  Stromberg  U. .  Oral pentasa in the treatment of active 
Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis of double-blind, placebo-controlled tri-
als .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2004 ; 2 : 379 – 88 . 
179.  Singleton  JW ,  Hanauer  SB ,  Gitnick  GL et al.  Mesalamine capsules for the 
treatment of active Crohn's disease: results of a 16-week trial. Pentasa 
Crohn's Disease Study Group .  Gastroenterology  1993 ; 104 : 1293 – 301 . 
180.  Malchow  H ,  Ewe  K ,  Brandes  JW et al.  European Cooperative Crohn's 
Disease Study (ECCDS): results of drug treatment .  Gastroenterology 
 1984 ; 86 : 249 – 66 . 
181.  Summers  RW ,  Switz  DM ,  Sessions  JT Jr et al.  National Cooperative 
Crohn's Disease Study: results of drug treatment .  Gastroenterology 
 1979 ; 77 : 847 – 69 . 
182.  Ford  AC ,  Kane  SV ,  Khan  KJ et al.  Effi  cacy of 5-aminosalicylates in 
Crohn's disease: systematic review and meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2011 ; 106 : 617 – 29 . 
183.  Greenberg  GR ,  Feagan  BG ,  Martin  F et al.  Oral budesonide for active 
Crohn's disease. Canadian Infl ammatory Bowel Disease Study Group . 
 N Engl J Med  1994 ; 331 : 836 – 41 . 
184.  Tremaine  WJ ,  Hanauer  SB ,  Katz  S et al.  Budesonide CIR capsules (once or 
twice daily divided-dose) in active Crohn's disease: a randomized placebo-
controlled study in the United States .  Am J Gastroenterol  2002 ; 97 : 1748 – 54 . 
185.  Sutherland  L ,  Singleton  J ,  Sessions  J et al.  Double blind, placebo con-
trolled trial of metronidazole in Crohn's disease .  Gut  1991 ; 32 : 1071 – 5 . 
186.  Khan  KJ ,  Ullman  TA ,  Ford  AC et al.  Antibiotic therapy in infl ammatory 
bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2011 ; 106 : 661 – 73 . 
187.  Colombel  JF ,  Lemann  M ,  Cassagnou  M et al.  A controlled trial comparing 
ciprofl oxacin with mesalazine for the treatment of active Crohn's disease. 
Groupe d'Etudes Th erapeutiques des Aff ections Infl ammatoires Digestives 
(GETAID) .  Am J Gastroenterol  1999 ; 94 : 674 – 8 . 
188.  Steinhart  AH ,  Feagan  BG ,  Wong  CJ et al.  Combined budesonide and 
antibiotic therapy for active Crohn's disease: a randomized controlled 
trial .  Gastroenterology  2002 ; 123 : 33 – 40 
189.  Arnold  GL ,  Beaves  MR ,  Pryjdun  VO et al.  Preliminary study of cipro-
fl oxacin in active Crohn's disease .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2002 ; 8 : 10 – 15 . 
190.  Prantera  C ,  Lochs  H ,  Grimaldi  M et al.  Rifaximin-extended intestinal 
release induces remission in patients with moderately active Crohn's 
disease .  Gastroenterology  2012 ; 142 : 473 – 81 . e4  
191.  Borgaonkar  MR ,  MacIntosh  DG ,  Fardy  JM. .  A meta-analysis of antimyco-
bacterial therapy for Crohn's disease .  Am J Gastroenterol  2000 ; 95 : 725 – 9 . 
192.  Feller  M ,  Huwiler  K ,  Schoepfer  A et al.  Long-term antibiotic treatment 
for Crohn's disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of placebo-
controlled trials .  Clin Infect Dis  2010 ; 50 : 473 – 80 . 
193.  Lewis  JD ,  Abreu  MT. .  Diet as a trigger or therapy for infl ammatory bowel 
diseases .  Gastroenterology  2017 ; 152 : 398 – 414 
194.  Benchimol  EI ,  Seow  CH ,  Steinhart  AH et al.  Traditional corticosteroids 
for induction of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev  2008 ; (2) : CD006792 . 
195.  Th omsen  OO ,  Cortot  A ,  Jewell  D et al.  A comparison of budesonide 
and mesalamine for active Crohn's disease. International Budesonide-
Mesalamine Study Group .  N Engl J Med  1998 ; 339 : 370 – 4 . 
196.  Yang   YX ,  Lichtenstein  GR .  Corticosteroids in Crohn’s disease .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  2002 ; 97 : 803 – 23 . 
197.  Chande  N ,  Patton  PH ,  Tsoulis  DJ et al.  Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine 
for maintenance of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev  2015 ; 2008 ; (10) : CD000067 . 
198.  Chande  N ,  Tsoulis  DJ ,  MacDonald  JK. .  Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine 
for induction of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev  2013 ; (4) : CD000545 . 
199.  McDonald  JWD ,  Wang  Y ,  Tsoulis  DJ et al.  Methotrexate for induction 
of remission in refractory Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2014 ; (8) : CD003459 – CD003459 . 
200.  Wang  Y ,  MacDonald  JK ,  Vandermeer  B et al.  Methotrexate for main-
tenance of remission in ulcerative colitis .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2015 ; (8) : CD007560 . 
201.  Gutierrez  JC ,  Hwang  K. .  Th e toxicity of methotrexate in male fertility 
and paternal teratogenicity .  Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol  2017 ; 13 : 
51 – 8 . 
202.  McDonald  JW ,  Wang  Y ,  Tsoulis  DJ et al.  Methotrexate for induction of 
remission in refractory Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2014 ; (8) : Cd003459 . 
203.  Feagan  BG ,  Rochon  J ,  Fedorak  RN et al.  Methotrexate for the treatment of 
Crohn's disease. Th e North American Crohn's Study Group Investigators . 
 N Engl J Med  1995 ; 332 : 292 – 7 . 
204.  Feagan  BG ,  Fedorak  RN ,  Irvine  EJ et al.  A comparison of methotrexate with 
placebo for the maintenance of remission in Crohn's disease. North American 
Crohn's Study Group Investigators .  N Engl J Med  2000 ; 342 : 1627 – 32 . 
205.  Chande  N ,  Patton  PH ,  Tsoulis  DJ et al.  Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine 
for maintenance of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev  2015 ; (10) : Cd000067 . 
206.  Hazlewood  GS ,  Rezaie  A ,  Borman  M et al.  Comparative eff ectiveness 
of immunosuppressants and biologics for inducing and maintaining 
remission in Crohn's disease: a network meta-analysis .  Gastroenterology 
 2015 ; 148 : 344 – 354.e5 . quiz e14-5  
207.  Yarur  AJ ,  Kubiliun  MJ ,  Czul  F et al.  Concentrations of 6-thioguanine 
nucleotide correlate with trough levels of infl iximab in patients with 
infl ammatory bowel disease on combination therapy .  Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol  2015 ; 13 : 1118 – 24.e3 . 
208.  Krieckaert  CL ,  Nurmohamed  MT ,  Wolbink  GJ. .  Methotrexate reduces 
immunogenicity in adalimumab treated rheumatoid arthritis patients in a 
dose dependent manner .  Ann Rheum Dis  2012 ; 71 : 1914 – 5 . 
209.  Winter  JW ,  Gaff ney  D ,  Shapiro  D et al.  Assessment of thiopurine methyl-
transferase enzyme activity is superior to genotype in predicting myelo-
suppression following azathioprine therapy in patients with infl ammatory 
bowel disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2007 ; 25 : 1069 – 77 . 
210.  Dubinsky  MC ,  Reyes  E ,  Ofman  J et al.  A cost-eff ectiveness analysis of 
alternative disease management strategies in patients with Crohn's disease 
treated with azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2005 ; 100 : 2239 – 47 . 
211.  Kotlyar  DS ,  Lewis  JD ,  Beaugerie  L et al.  Risk of lymphoma in patients 
with infl ammatory bowel disease treated with azathioprine and 6-mercap-
topurine: a meta-analysis .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2015 ; 13 : 847 – 858.
e4 . quiz e48-50  
212.  Kappelman  MD ,  Farkas  DK ,  Long  MD et al.  Risk of cancer in patients 
with infl ammatory bowel diseases: a nationwide population-based cohort 
study with 30 years of follow-up evaluation .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
 2014 ; 12 : 265 – 273.e1 . 
213.  McDonald  JW ,  Feagan  BG ,  Jewell  D et al.  Cyclosporine for induc-
tion of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2005 ; (2) : CD000297 . 
214.  McSharry  K ,  Dalzell  AM ,  Leiper  K et al.  Systematic review: the role of 
tacrolimus in the management of Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2011 ; 34 : 1282 – 94 . 
215.  Renna  S ,  Cottone  M ,  Orlando  A. .  Optimization of the treatment with 
immunosuppressants and biologics in infl ammatory bowel disease .  World 
J Gastroenterol  2014 ; 20 : 9675 – 90 . 
216.  Akobeng  AK ,  Zachos  M. .  Tumor necrosis factor-alpha antibody for 
induction of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2004 ; (1) : CD003574 . 
217.  Behm  BW ,  Bickston  SJ. .  Tumor necrosis factor-alpha antibody for main-
tenance of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2008 ; (1) : CD006893 . 
218.  Colombel  JF ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Adalimumab for mainte-
nance of clinical response and remission in patients with Crohn's disease: 
the CHARM trial .  Gastroenterology  2007 ; 132 : 52 – 65 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
34
219.  Hanauer  SB ,  Feagan  BG ,  Lichtenstein  GR et al.  Maintenance infl iximab for 
Crohn's disease: the ACCENT I randomised trial .  Lancet  2002 ; 359 : 1541 – 9 . 
220.  Schreiber  S ,  Khaliq-Kareemi  M ,  Lawrance  IC et al.  Maintenance therapy 
with certolizumab pegol for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2007 ; 357 : 
239 – 50 . 
221.  Colombel  JF ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Reinisch  W et al.  Infl iximab, azathioprine, or 
combination therapy for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2010 ; 362 : 1383 – 95 . 
222.  Kawalec  P ,  Mikrut  A ,  Wisniewska  N et al.  Tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
antibodies (infl iximab, adalimumab and certolizumab) in Crohn's disease: 
systematic review and meta-analysis .  Arch Med Sci  2013 ; 9 : 765 – 79 . 
223.  Ford  AC ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Khan  KJ et al.  Effi  cacy of biological therapies in 
infl ammatory bowel disease: systematic review and meta-analysis .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  2011 ; 106 : 644 – 59 . quiz 660  
224.  Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Latent Tuberculosis Infection: A 
Guide for Primary Health Care Providers .  2014 (cited 13 September 2017); 
Available from  https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/ltbi/diagnosis.htm 
225.  Farraye  FA ,  Melmed  GY ,  Lichtenstein  GR et al.  ACG Clinical Guideline: 
preventive care in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Am J Gastroenterol 
 2017 ; 112 : 241 – 58 . 
226.  Van Assche  G ,  Lewis  JD ,  Lichtenstein  GR et al.  Th e London position 
statement of the World Congress of Gastroenterology on Biological 
Th erapy for IBD with the European Crohn's and Colitis Organisation: 
safety .  Am J Gastroenterol  2011 ; 106 : 1594 – 602 . quiz 1593, 1603  
227.  MacDonald  JK ,  McDonald  JW. .  Natalizumab for induction of remission 
in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2007 ; (1) : CD006097 . 
228.  Bloomgren  G ,  Richman  S ,  Hotermans  C et al.  Risk of natalizumab-
associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy .  N Engl J Med 
 2012 ; 366 : 1870 – 80 . 
229.  Chandar  AK ,  Singh  S ,  Murad  MH et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of natalizumab 
and vedolizumab for the management of Crohn's disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2015 ; 21 : 1695 – 708 . 
230.  Lin  L ,  Liu  X ,  Wang  D et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of antiintegrin antibody 
for infl ammatory bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis . 
 Medicine (Baltimore)  2015 ; 94 : e556 . 
231.  Sands  BE ,  Feagan  BG ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Eff ects of vedolizumab induction 
therapy for patients with Crohn's disease in whom tumor necrosis factor 
antagonist treatment failed .  Gastroenterology  2014 ; 147 : 618 – 627.e3 . 
232.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Feagan  BG ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Vedolizumab as induc-
tion and maintenance therapy for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med 
 2013 ; 369 : 711 – 21 . 
233.  Feagan  B ,  Sandborn  W ,  Gasink  C et al.  Ustekinumab as induction and 
maintenance therapy for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2016 ; 375 : 1946 – 60 . 
234.  Papp  K ,  Gottlieb  AB ,  Naldi  L et al.  Safety surveillance for ustekinumab 
and other psoriasis treatments from the Psoriasis Longitudinal Assess-
ment and Registry (PSOLAR) .  J Drugs Dermatol  2015 ; 14 : 706 – 14 . 
235.  Feagan  BG ,  McDonald  JW ,  Rochon  J et al.  Low-dose cyclosporine for the 
treatment of Crohn's disease. Th e Canadian Crohn's Relapse Prevention 
Trial Investigators .  N Engl J Med  1994 ; 330 : 1846 – 51 . 
236.  Stange  EF ,  Modigliani  R ,  Pena  AS et al.  European trial of cyclosporine in 
chronic active Crohn's disease: a 12-month study. Th e European Study 
Group .  Gastroenterology  1995 ; 109 : 774 – 82 . 
237.  Fellermann  K ,  Steff en  M ,  Stein  J et al.  Mycophenolate mofetil: lack of 
effi  cacy in chronic active infl ammatory bowel disease .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2000 ; 14 : 171 – 6 . 
238.  Neurath  MF ,  Wanitschke  R ,  Peters  M et al.  Randomised trial of myco-
phenolate mofetil versus azathioprine for treatment of chronic active 
Crohn's disease .  Gut  1999 ; 44 : 625 – 8 . 
239.  Ierardi  E ,  Principi  M ,  Francavilla  R et al.  Oral tacrolimus long-term 
therapy in patients with Crohn's disease and steroid resistance .  Aliment 
Pharmacol Th er  2001 ; 15 : 371 – 7 . 
240.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Present  DH ,  Isaacs  KL et al.  Tacrolimus for the treatment 
of fi stulas in patients with Crohn's disease: a randomized, placebo-con-
trolled trial .  Gastroenterology  2003 ; 125 : 380 – 8 . 
241.  Gerich  ME ,  Pardi  DS ,  Bruining  DH et al.  Tacrolimus salvage in anti-
tumor necrosis factor antibody treatment-refractory Crohn's disease . 
 Infl amm Bowel Dis  2013 ; 19 : 1107 – 11 . 
242.  Bramuzzo  M ,  Ventura  A ,  Martelossi  S et al.  Th alidomide for infl ammato-
ry bowel disease: Systematic review .  Medicine (Baltimore)  2016 ; 95 : e4239 . 
243.  Chun  A ,  Chadi  RM ,  Korelitz  BI et al.  Intravenous corticotrophin vs. 
hydrocortisone in the treatment of hospitalized patients with Crohn's 
disease: a randomized double-blind study and follow-up .  Infl amm Bowel 
Dis  1998 ; 4 : 177 – 81 . 
244.  Present  DH ,  Rutgeerts  P ,  Targan  S et al.  Infl iximab for the treatment of fi s-
tulas in patients with Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  1999 ; 340 : 1398 – 405 . 
245.  Sands  BE ,  Anderson  FH ,  Bernstein  CN et al.  Infl iximab maintenance 
therapy for fi stulizing Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2004 ; 350 : 876 – 85 . 
246.  Sands  BE ,  Blank  MA ,  Patel  K et al.  Long-term treatment of rectovaginal 
fi stulas in Crohn's disease: response to infl iximab in the ACCENT II 
Study .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2004 ; 2 : 912 – 20 . 
247.  Song  YN ,  Zheng  P ,  Xiao  JH et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of adalimumab for 
the Crohn's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of published 
randomized placebo-controlled trials .  Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2014 ; 70 : 
 907 – 14 . 
248.  Schreiber  S ,  Lawrance  IC ,  Th omsen  OO et al.  Randomised clinical trial: 
certolizumab pegol for fi stulas in Crohn's disease - subgroup results from 
a placebo-controlled study .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2011 ; 33 : 185 – 93 . 
249.  Th ia  KT ,  Mahadevan  U ,  Feagan  BG et al.  Ciprofl oxacin or metronidazole 
for the treatment of perianal fi stulas in patients with Crohn's disease: a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study .  Infl amm Bowel 
Dis  2009 ; 15 : 17 – 24 . 
250.  West  RL ,  van der Woude  CJ ,  Hansen  BE et al.  Clinical and endosonographic 
eff ect of ciprofl oxacin on the treatment of perianal fi stulae in Crohn's 
disease with infl iximab: a double-blind placebo-controlled study .  Aliment 
Pharmacol Th er  2004 ; 20 : 1329 – 36 . 
251.  de Groof  EJ ,  Sahami  S ,  Lucas  C et al.  Treatment of perianal fi stulas in 
Crohn's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis comparing seton 
drainage and anti-TNF treatment .  Colorectal Dis  2016 ; 18 : 667 – 75 . 
252.  Regueiro  M ,  Mardini  H. .  Treatment of perianal fi stulizing Crohn's disease 
with infl iximab alone or as an adjunct to exam under anesthesia with 
seton placement .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2003 ; 9 : 98 – 103 . 
253.  Nguyen  DL ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Loft us  EV Jr. et al.  Similar outcomes of surgi-
cal and medical treatment of intra-abdominal abscesses in patients with 
Crohn's disease .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2012 ; 10 : 400 – 4 . 
254.  de Parades  V ,  Far  HS ,  Etienney  I et al.  Seton drainage and fi brin glue 
injection for complex anal fi stulas .  Colorectal Dis  2010 ; 12 : 459 – 63 . 
255.  Hyman  N. .  Endoanal advancement fl ap repair for complex anorectal 
fi stulas .  Am J Surg  1999 ; 178 : 337 – 40 . 
256.  Sonoda  T ,  Hull  T ,  Piedmonte  MR et al.  Outcomes of primary repair of 
anorectal and rectovaginal fi stulas using the endorectal advancement fl ap . 
 Dis Colon Rectum  2002 ; 45 : 1622 – 8 . 
257.  Soltani  A ,  Kaiser  AM. .  Endorectal advancement fl ap for cryptoglandular 
or Crohn's fi stula-in-ano .  Dis Colon Rectum  2010 ; 53 : 486 – 95 . 
258.  Gaertner  WB ,  Decanini  A ,  Mellgren  A et al.  Does infl iximab infusion 
impact results of operative treatment for Crohn's perianal fi stulas? 
 Dis Colon Rectum  2007 ; 50 : 1754 – 60 . 
259.  Topstad  DR ,  Panaccione  R ,  Heine  JA et al.  Combined seton placement, 
infl iximab infusion, and maintenance immunosuppressives improve heal-
ing rate in fi stulizing anorectal Crohn's disease: a single center experience . 
 Dis Colon Rectum  2003 ; 46 : 577 – 83 . 
260.  Hyder  SA ,  Travis  SP ,  Jewell  DP et al.  Fistulating anal Crohn's disease: 
results of combined surgical and infl iximab treatment .  Dis Colon Rectum 
 2006 ; 49 : 1837 – 41 . 
261.  Singh  S ,  Ding  NS ,  Mathis  KL et al.  Systematic review with meta-analysis: 
faecal diversion for management of perianal Crohn's disease .  Aliment 
Pharmacol Th er  2015 ; 42 : 783 – 92 . 
262.  van der Hagen  SJ ,  Baeten  CG ,  Soeters  PB et al.  Anti-TNF-alpha (infl iximab) 
used as induction treatment in case of active proctitis in a multistep strategy 
followed by defi nitive surgery of complex anal fi stulas in Crohn's disease: a 
preliminary report .  Dis Colon Rectum  2005 ; 48 : 758 – 67 . 
263.  Bernstein  LH ,  Frank  MS ,  Brandt  LJ et al.  Healing of perineal Crohn's 
disease with metronidazole .  Gastroenterology  1980 ; 79 : 357 – 65 . 
264.  Brandt  LJ ,  Bernstein  LH ,  Boley  SJ et al.  Metronidazole therapy for per-
ineal Crohn's disease: a follow-up study .  Gastroenterology  1982 ; 83 : 
 383 – 7 . 
265.  Jakobovits  J ,  Schuster  MM. .  Metronidazole therapy for Crohn's disease 
and associated fi stulae .  Am J Gastroenterol  1984 ; 79 : 533 – 40 . 
266.  Solomon  M ,  RS  M ,  O'Connor  B et al.  Combination ciprofl oxacin and 
metronidazole in severe perianal Crohn's disease .  Can J Gastroenterol 
 1993 ; 7 : 571 – 3 . 
267.  Farrell  RJ ,  Shah  SA ,  Lodhavia  PJ et al.  Clinical experience with infl iximab 
therapy in 100 patients with Crohn's disease .  Am J Gastroenterol  2000 ; 
95 : 3490 – 7 . 
268.  Ricart  E ,  Panaccione  R ,  Loft us  EV et al.  Infl iximab for Crohn's disease in 
clinical practice at the Mayo Clinic: the fi rst 100 patients .  Am J Gastroen-
terol  2001 ; 96 : 722 – 9 . 
269.  Hanauer  SB ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Human anti-tumor necrosis 
factor monoclonal antibody (adalimumab) in Crohn's disease: the 
CLASSIC-I trial .  Gastroenterology  2006 ; 130 : 323 – 33 . quiz 591  
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
35
270.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Rutgeerts  P ,  Enns  R et al.  Adalimumab induction therapy 
for Crohn disease previously treated with infl iximab: a randomized trial . 
 Ann Intern Med  2007 ; 146 : 829 – 38 . 
271.  Colombel  JF ,  Schwartz  DA ,  Sandborn  WJ et al.  Adalimumab for the treat-
ment of fi stulas in patients with Crohn's disease .  Gut  2009 ; 58 : 940 – 8 . 
272.  Hinojosa  J ,  Gomollon  F ,  Garcia  S et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of short-term 
adalimumab treatment in patients with active Crohn's disease who lost 
response or showed intolerance to infl iximab: a prospective, open-label, 
multicentre trial .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2007 ; 25 : 409 – 18 . 
273.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Feagan  BG ,  Stoinov  S et al.  Certolizumab pegol for the 
treatment of Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2007 ; 357 : 228 – 38 . 
274.  Feagan  B ,  Schwartz  D ,  Danese  S et al.  Vedolizumab for the treatment of 
fi stulizing Crohn's disease: An exploratory analysis of data from GEMINI 
2 (abstract) .  Gastroenterology  2015 ; 148 : S274 . 
275.  Steinhart  AH ,  Ewe  K ,  Griffi  ths  AM et al.  Corticosteroids for mainte-
nance of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2003 ; (4) : Cd000301 . 
276.  Markowitz  J ,  Grancher  K ,  Kohn  N et al.  A multicenter trial of 6-mer-
captopurine and prednisone in children with newly diagnosed Crohn's 
disease .  Gastroenterology  2000 ; 119 : 895 – 902 
277.  Cosnes  J ,  Bourrier  A ,  Laharie  D et al.  Early administration of azathio-
prine vs conventional management of Crohn's Disease: a randomized 
controlled trial .  Gastroenterology  2013 ; 145 : 758 – 765.e2 . quiz e14-5  
278.  Candy  S ,  Wright  J ,  Gerber  M et al.  A controlled double blind study of 
azathioprine in the management of Crohn's disease .  Gut  1995 ; 37 : 
674 – 8 . 
279.  Willoughby  JM ,  Beckett  J ,  Kumar  PJ et al.  Controlled trial of azathioprine 
in Crohn's disease .  Lancet  1971 ; 2 : 944 – 7 . 
280.  Rosenberg  JL ,  Levin  B ,  Wall  AJ et al.  A controlled trial of azathioprine in 
Crohn's disease .  Am J Dig Dis  1975 ; 20 : 721 – 6 . 
281.  Pearson  DC ,  May  GR ,  Fick  G et al.  Azathioprine for maintaining remis-
sion of Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2000 ; (2) : Cd000067 . 
282.  Prefontaine  E ,  Macdonald  JK ,  Sutherland  LR. .  Azathioprine or 6-mer-
captopurine for induction of remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev  2010 ; (6) : Cd000545 . 
283.  Lemann  M ,  Zenjari  T ,  Bouhnik  Y et al.  Methotrexate in Crohn's disease: 
long-term effi  cacy and toxicity .  Am J Gastroenterol  2000 ; 95 : 1730 – 4 . 
284.  Fraser  AG ,  Morton  D ,  McGovern  D et al.  Th e effi  cacy of methotrexate for 
maintaining remission in infl ammatory bowel disease .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2002 ; 16 : 693 – 7 . 
285.  Arora  S ,  Katkov  W ,  Cooley  J et al.  Methotrexate in Crohn's disease: results 
of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial .  Hepatogastroen-
terology  1999 ; 46 : 1724 – 9 . 
286.  International Mesalazine Study Group. Coated oral 5-aminosalicylic 
acid versus placebo in maintaining remission of inactive Crohn's disease . 
 Aliment Pharmacol Th er  1990 ; 4 : 55 – 64 
287.  Bresci  G ,  Petrucci  A ,  Banti  S. .  5-aminosalicylic acid in the prevention 
of relapses of Crohn's disease in remission: a long-term study .  Int J Clin 
Pharmacol Res  1991 ; 11 : 200 – 2 . 
288.  Brignola  C ,  Iannone  P ,  Pasquali  S et al.  Placebo-controlled trial of oral 
5-ASA in relapse prevention of Crohn's disease .  Dig Dis Sci  1992 ; 37 : 
 29 – 32 
289.  Prantera  C ,  Pallone  F ,  Brunetti  G et al.  Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid (Asacol) 
in the maintenance treatment of Crohn's disease. Th e Italian IBD Study 
Group .  Gastroenterology  1992 ; 103 : 363 – 8 . 
290.  Gendre  JP ,  Mary  JY ,  Florent  C et al.  Oral mesalamine (Pentasa) as main-
tenance treatment in Crohn's disease: a multicenter placebo-controlled 
study. Th e Groupe d'Etudes Th erapeutiques des Aff ections Infl ammatoires 
Digestives (GETAID) .  Gastroenterology  1993 ; 104 : 435 – 9 . 
291.  Arber  N ,  Odes  HS ,  Fireman  Z et al.  A controlled double blind multicenter 
study of the eff ectiveness of 5-aminosalicylic acid in patients with Crohn's 
disease in remission .  J Clin Gastroenterol  1995 ; 20 : 203 – 6 . 
292.  Th omson  AB ,  Wright  JP ,  Vatn  M et al.  Mesalazine (Mesasal/Claversal) 
1.5 g b.d. vs. placebo in the maintenance of remission of patients with 
Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  1995 ; 9 : 673 – 83 . 
293.  Modigliani  R ,  Colombel  JF ,  Dupas  JL et al.  Mesalamine in Crohn's 
disease with steroid-induced remission: eff ect on steroid withdrawal and 
remission maintenance, Groupe d'Etudes Th erapeutiques des Aff ections 
Infl ammatoires Digestives .  Gastroenterology  1996 ; 110 : 688 – 93 . 
294.  de Franchis  R ,  Omodei  P ,  Ranzi  T et al.  Controlled trial of oral 5-ami-
nosalicylic acid for the prevention of early relapse in Crohn's disease . 
 Aliment Pharmacol Th er  1997 ; 11 : 845 – 52 . 
295.  Sutherland  LR ,  Steinhart  AH. .  Mesalazine as a maintenance treatment in 
Crohn's disease .  Gut  1998 ; 42 : 143 – 4 . 
296.  Mahmud  N ,  Kamm  MA ,  Dupas  JL et al.  Olsalazine is not superior to 
placebo in maintaining remission of inactive Crohn's colitis and ileocolitis: 
a double blind, parallel, randomised, multicentre study .  Gut  2001 ; 49 : 552 – 6 . 
297.  Messori  A ,  Brignola  C ,  Trallori  G et al.  Eff ectiveness of 5-aminosalicylic 
acid for maintaining remission in patients with Crohn's disease: a meta-
analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol  1994 ; 89 : 692 – 8 . 
298.  Camma  C ,  Giunta  M ,  Rosselli  M et al.  Mesalamine in the maintenance 
treatment of Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis adjusted for confounding 
variables .  Gastroenterology  1997 ; 113 : 1465 – 73 . 
299.  Akobeng  AK ,  Th omas  AG. .  Enteral nutrition for maintenance of remis-
sion in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2007 ; (3) : Cd005984 . 
300.  Steinhart  AH ,  Forbes  A ,  Mills  EC et al.  Systematic review: the potential 
infl uence of mesalazine formulation on maintenance of remission in 
Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2007 ; 25 : 1389 – 99 . 
301.  Greenberg  GR ,  Feagan  BG ,  Martin  F et al.  Oral budesonide as mainte-
nance treatment for Crohn's disease: a placebo-controlled, dose-ranging 
study. Canadian Infl ammatory Bowel Disease Study Group .  Gastroenterol-
ogy  1996 ; 110 : 45 – 51 
302.  Ferguson  A ,  Campieri  M ,  Doe  W et al.  Oral budesonide as maintenance 
therapy in Crohn's disease--results of a 12-month study. Global Budeson-
ide Study Group .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  1998 ; 12 : 175 – 83 . 
303.  Gross  V ,  Andus  T ,  Ecker  KW et al.  Low dose oral pH modifi ed release 
budesonide for maintenance of steroid induced remission in Crohn's 
disease. Th e Budesonide Study Group .  Gut  1998 ; 42 : 493 – 6 . 
304.  Cortot  A ,  Colombel  JF ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Switch from systemic steroids to 
budesonide in steroid dependent patients with inactive Crohn's disease . 
 Gut  2001 ; 48 : 186 – 90 . 
305.  Hanauer  S ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Persson  A et al.  Budesonide as maintenance 
treatment in Crohn's disease: a placebo-controlled trial .  Aliment Pharma-
col Th er  2005 ; 21 : 363 – 71 . 
306.  Lofb erg  R ,  Rutgeerts  P ,  Malchow  H et al.  Budesonide prolongs time to 
relapse in ileal and ileocaecal Crohn's disease. A placebo controlled one 
year study .  Gut  1996 ; 39 : 82 – 6 . 
307.  Papi  C ,  Luchetti  R ,  Gili  L et al.  Budesonide in the treatment of Crohn's 
disease: a meta-analysis .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2000 ; 14 : 1419 – 28 . 
308.  Simms  L ,  Steinhart  AH. .  Budesonide for maintenance of remission in 
Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2001 ; (1) : Cd002913 . 
309.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Lofb erg  R ,  Feagan  BG et al.  Budesonide for maintenance 
of remission in patients with Crohn's disease in medically induced remis-
sion: a predetermined pooled analysis of four randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials .  Am J Gastroenterol  2005 ; 100 : 1780 – 7 . 
310.  Benchimol  EI ,  Seow  CH ,  Otley  AR et al.  Budesonide for maintenance of 
remission in Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev  2009 ; (1) :
 Cd002913 . 
311.  Rutgeerts  P ,  D'Haens  G ,  Targan  S et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of retreatment 
with anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody (infl iximab) to maintain remis-
sion in Crohn's disease .  Gastroenterology  1999 ; 117 : 761 – 9 . 
312.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Feagan  BG ,  Radford-Smith  G et al.  CDP571, a humanised 
monoclonal antibody to tumour necrosis factor alpha, for moderate to 
severe Crohn's disease: a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled 
trial .  Gut  2004 ; 53 : 1485 – 93 . 
313.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Feagan  BG ,  Hanauer  SB et al.  An engineered human 
antibody to TNF (CDP571) for active Crohn's disease: a randomized 
double-blind placebo-controlled trial .  Gastroenterology  2001 ; 120 : 1330 – 8 . 
314.  Feagan  BG ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  Baker  JP et al.  A randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial of CDP571, a humanized monoclonal antibody to 
tumour necrosis factor-alpha, in patients with corticosteroid-dependent 
Crohn's disease .  Aliment Pharmacol Th er  2005 ; 21 : 373 – 84 . 
315.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Deltenre  P ,  de Suray  N et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of 
tumor necrosis factor antagonists in Crohn's disease: meta-analysis of 
placebo-controlled trials .  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol  2008 ; 6 : 644 – 53 . 
316.  Baert  F ,  Noman  M ,  Vermeire  S et al.  Infl uence of immunogenicity on 
the long-term effi  cacy of infl iximab in Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med 
 2003 ; 348 : 601 – 8 . 
317.  Vermeire  S ,  Noman  M ,  Van Assche  G et al.  Eff ectiveness of concomitant 
immunosuppressive therapy in suppressing the formation of antibodies to 
infl iximab in Crohn's disease .  Gut  2007 ; 56 : 1226 – 31 . 
318.  Columbel  J ,  Adedokun  OJ ,  Gasnik  C et al.  Higher levels of infl iximab 
may alleviate the need of azathioprine comedication in the treatment of 
patients with Crohn's disease: a sonic post hoc analysis (abstract) .  Gastro-
enterology  2017 ; 152 : S37 – S38 . 
319.  Mackey  AC ,  Green  L ,  Liang  LC et al.  Hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma 
associated with infl iximab use in young patients treated for infl ammatory 
bowel disease .  J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr  2007 ; 44 : 265 – 7 . 
Lichtenstein  et al. 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY 
VOLUME XXX | XXX 2018   www.nature.com/ajg
 
36
320.  Lichtenstein  GR ,  Diamond  RH ,  Wagner  CL et al.  Clinical trial: benefi ts 
and risks of immunomodulators and maintenance infl iximab for IBD-
subgroup analyses across four randomized trials .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2009 ; 30 : 210 – 26 . 
321.  Toruner  M ,  Loft us  EV Jr. ,  Harmsen  WS et al.  Risk factors for opportunistic 
infections in patients with infl ammatory bowel disease .  Gastroenterology 
 2008 ; 134 : 929 – 36 . 
322.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Colombel  JF ,  Enns  R et al.  Natalizumab induction and 
maintenance therapy for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med  2005 ; 353 : 1912 – 25 . 
323.  Targan  SR ,  Feagan  BG ,  Fedorak  RN et al.  Natalizumab for the treatment 
of active Crohn's disease: results of the ENCORE Trial .  Gastroenterology 
 2007 ; 132 : 1672 – 83 . 
324.  Van Assche  G ,  Van Ranst  M ,  Sciot  R et al.  Progressive multifocal leukoen-
cephalopathy aft er natalizumab therapy for Crohn's disease .  N Engl J Med 
 2005 ; 353 : 362 – 8 . 
325.  Avidan  B ,  Sakhnini  E ,  Lahat  A et al.  Risk factors regarding the need for a 
second operation in patients with Crohn's disease .  Digestion  2005 ; 72 : 248 – 53 . 
326.  Nguyen  GC ,  Loft us  EV Jr. ,  Hirano  I et al.  American Gastroenterological 
Association Institute Guideline on the management of Crohn's disease 
aft er surgical resection .  Gastroenterology  2017 ; 152 : 271 – 5 . 
327.  Cosnes  J ,  Carbonnel  F ,  Beaugerie  L et al.  Eff ects of cigarette smoking on 
the long-term course of Crohn's disease .  Gastroenterology  1996 ; 110 : 
 424 – 31 . 
328.  Regueiro  M ,  Velayos  F ,  Greer  JB et al.  American Gastroenterological 
Association Institute Technical Review on the management of Crohn's 
disease aft er surgical resection .  Gastroenterology  2017 ; 152 : 277 – 295.e3 . 
329.  Caprilli  R ,  Andreoli  A ,  Capurso  L et al.  Oral mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic 
acid; Asacol) for the prevention of post-operative recurrence of Crohn's 
disease. Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio del Colon e del Retto (GISC) . 
 Aliment Pharmacol Th er  1994 ; 8 : 35 – 43 
330.  Brignola  C ,  Cottone  M ,  Pera  A et al.  Mesalamine in the prevention of en-
doscopic recurrence aft er intestinal resection for Crohn's disease. Italian 
Cooperative Study Group .  Gastroenterology  1995 ; 108 : 345 – 9 . 
331.  Lochs  H ,  Mayer  M ,  Fleig  WE et al.  Prophylaxis of postoperative relapse in 
Crohn's disease with mesalamine: European Cooperative Crohn's Disease 
Study VI .  Gastroenterology  2000 ; 118 : 264 – 73 . 
332.  Caprilli  R ,  Cottone  M ,  Tonelli  F et al.  Two mesalazine regimens in the 
prevention of the post-operative recurrence of Crohn's disease: a prag-
matic, double-blind, randomized controlled trial .  Aliment Pharmacol 
Th er  2003 ; 17 : 517 – 23 . 
333.  Cottone  M ,  Camma  C. .  Mesalamine and relapse prevention in Crohn's 
disease .  Gastroenterology  2000 ; 119 : 597 . 
334.  Doherty  G ,  Bennett  G ,  Patil  S et al.  Interventions for prevention of post-
operative recurrence of Crohn's disease .  Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
 2009 ; (4) : Cd006873 . 
335.  Ford  AC ,  Khan  KJ ,  Talley  NJ et al.  5-aminosalicylates prevent relapse of 
Crohn's disease aft er surgically induced remission: systematic review and 
meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol  2011 ; 106 : 413 – 20 . 
336.  Rutgeerts  P ,  Hiele  M ,  Geboes  K et al.  Controlled trial of metronidazole 
treatment for prevention of Crohn's recurrence aft er ileal resection . 
 Gastroenterology  1995 ; 108 : 1617 – 21 . 
337.  Rutgeerts  P ,  Van Assche  G ,  Vermeire  S et al.  Ornidazole for prophylaxis 
of postoperative Crohn's disease recurrence: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial .  Gastroenterology  2005 ; 128 : 856 – 61 . 
338.  D'Haens  GR ,  Vermeire  S ,  Van Assche  G et al.  Th erapy of metronidazole 
with azathioprine to prevent postoperative recurrence of Crohn's disease: 
a controlled randomized trial .  Gastroenterology  2008 ; 135 : 1123 – 9 . 
339.  Hanauer  SB ,  Korelitz  BI ,  Rutgeerts  P et al.  Postoperative maintenance 
of Crohn's disease remission with 6-mercaptopurine, mesalamine, or 
placebo: a 2-year trial .  Gastroenterology  2004 ; 127 : 723 – 9 . 
340.  Ardizzone  S ,  Maconi  G ,  Sampietro  GM et al.  Azathioprine and mesa-
lamine for prevention of relapse aft er conservative surgery for Crohn's 
disease .  Gastroenterology  2004 ; 127 : 730 – 40 . 
341.  Herfarth  H ,  Tjaden  C ,  Lukas  M et al.  Adverse events in clinical trials with 
azathioprine and mesalamine for prevention of postoperative recurrence 
of Crohn's disease .  Gut  2006 ; 55 : 1525 – 6 . 
342.  Reinisch  W ,  Angelberger  S ,  Petritsch  W et al.  Azathioprine versus mesala-
zine for prevention of postoperative clinical recurrence in patients with 
Crohn's disease with endoscopic recurrence: effi  cacy and safety results 
of a randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre trial .  Gut 
 2010 ; 59 : 752 – 9 . 
343.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L ,  Deltenre  P ,  Ardizzone  S et al.  Azathioprine and 6-mer-
captopurine for the prevention of postoperative recurrence in Crohn's 
disease: a meta-analysis .  Am J Gastroenterol  2009 ; 104 : 2089 – 96 . 
344.  Shen  FC ,  Zhang  HJ ,  Zhao  XD et al.  Purine analogues compared with 
mesalamine or 5-ASA for the prevention of postoperative recurrence in 
Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis .  Int J Clin Pract  2012 ; 66 : 758 – 66 . 
345.  Regueiro  M ,  Schraut  W ,  Baidoo  L et al.  Infl iximab prevents Crohn's disease 
recurrence aft er ileal resection .  Gastroenterology  2009 ; 136 : 441 – 450.
e1 . quiz 716  
346.  Sorrentino  D ,  Terrosu  G ,  Avellini  C et al.  Prevention of postoperative 
recurrence of Crohn's disease by infl iximab .  Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
 2006 ; 18 : 457 – 9 . 
347.  Sorrentino  D ,  Terrosu  G ,  Avellini  C et al.  Infl iximab with low-dose 
methotrexate for prevention of postsurgical recurrence of ileocolonic 
Crohn disease .  Arch Intern Med  2007 ; 167 : 1804 – 7 . 
348.  Papamichael  K ,  Archavlis  E ,  Lariou  C et al.  Adalimumab for the preven-
tion and/or treatment of post-operative recurrence of Crohn's disease: 
a prospective, two-year, single center, pilot study .  J Crohns Colitis 
 2012 ; 6 : 924 – 31 . 
349.  Yoshida  K ,  Fukunaga  K ,  Ikeuchi  H et al.  Scheduled infl iximab monother-
apy to prevent recurrence of Crohn's disease following ileocolic or ileal 
resection: a 3-year prospective randomized open trial .  Infl amm Bowel Dis 
 2012 ; 18 : 1617 – 23 . 
350.  Savarino  E ,  Dulbecco  P ,  Bodini  G et al.  Prevention of postoperative recur-
rence of Crohn's disease by Adalimumab: a case series .  Eur J Gastroen-
terol Hepatol  2012 ; 24 : 468 – 70 . 
351.  Aguas  M ,  Bastida  G ,  Cerrillo  E et al.  Adalimumab in prevention of 
postoperative recurrence of Crohn's disease in high-risk patients .  World J 
Gastroenterol  2012 ; 18 : 4391 – 8 . 
352.  Araki  T ,  Uchida  K ,  Okita  Y et al.  Impact of postoperative infl ixi-
mab maintenance therapy on preventing the surgical recurrence of 
Crohn's disease: a single-center paired case-control study .  Surg Today 
 2014 ; 44 : 291 – 6 . 
353.  De Cruz  P ,  Kamm  MA ,  Hamilton  AL et al.  Crohn's disease management 
aft er intestinal resection: a randomised trial .  Lancet  2015 ; 385 : 1406 – 17 . 
354.  Sorrentino  D ,  Paviotti  A ,  Terrosu  G et al.  Low-dose maintenance therapy 
with infl iximab prevents postsurgical recurrence of Crohn's disease .  Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol  2010 ; 8 : 591 – 599.e1 . quiz e78-9  
355.  Regueiro  M ,  Kip  KE ,  Baidoo  L et al.  Postoperative therapy with infl iximab 
prevents long-term Crohn's disease recurrence .  Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol  2014 ; 12 : 1494 – 1502.e1 . 
356.  Regueiro  M ,  Feagan  BG ,  Zou  B et al.  Infl iximab reduces endoscopic, but 
not clinical, recurrence of Crohn's disease aft er ileocolonic resection . 
 Gastroenterology  2016 ; 150 : 1568 – 78 . 
357.  Singh  S ,  Garg  SK ,  Pardi  DS et al.  Comparative effi  cacy of pharmacologic 
interventions in preventing relapse of Crohn's disease aft er surgery: 
a systematic review and network meta-analysis .  Gastroenterology 
 2015 ; 148 : 64 – 76.e2 . quiz e14.  
358.  van Loo  ES ,  Dijkstra  G ,  Ploeg  RJ et al.  Prevention of postoperative recur-
rence of Crohn's disease .  J Crohns Colitis  2012 ; 6 : 637 – 46 . 
359.  Yamamoto  T ,  Umegae  S ,  Matsumoto  K. .  Impact of infl iximab therapy af-
ter early endoscopic recurrence following ileocolonic resection of Crohn's 
disease: a prospective pilot study .  Infl amm Bowel Dis  2009 ; 15 : 1460 – 6 . 
360.  Sorrentino  D ,  Terrosu  G ,  Paviotti  A et al.  Early diagnosis and treatment of 
postoperative endoscopic recurrence of Crohn's disease: partial benefi t by 
infl iximab--a pilot study .  Dig Dis Sci  2012 ; 57 : 1341 – 8 . 
361.  Travis  SP ,  Stange  EF ,  Lemann  M et al.  European evidence based consensus 
on the diagnosis and management of Crohn's disease: current manage-
ment .  Gut  2006 ; 55 ( (Suppl 1) ): i16 – i35 . 
362.  Gardiner  KR ,  Dasari  BV. .  Operative management of small bowel Crohn's 
disease .  Surg Clin North Am  2007 ; 87 : 587 – 610 
363.  Steele  SR. .  Operative management of Crohn's disease of the colon includ-
ing anorectal disease .  Surg Clin North Am  2007 ; 87 : 611 – 31 . 
364.  Yamaguchi  A ,  Matsui  T ,  Sakurai  T et al.  Th e clinical characteristics and 
outcome of intraabdominal abscess in Crohn's disease .  J Gastroenterol 
 2004 ; 39 : 441 – 8 . 
365.  Gervais  DA ,  Hahn  PF ,  O'Neill  MJ et al.  Percutaneous abscess drainage 
in Crohn disease: technical success and short- and long-term outcomes 
during 14 years .  Radiology  2002 ; 222 : 645 – 51 . 
366.  Golfi eri  R ,  Cappelli  A ,  Giampalma  E et al.  CT-guided percutaneous pelvic 
abscess drainage in Crohn's disease .  Tech Coloproctol  2006 ; 10 : 99 – 105 . 
367.  Gutierrez  A ,  Lee  H ,  Sands  BE. .  Outcome of surgical versus percutane-
ous drainage of abdominal and pelvic abscesses in Crohn's disease .  Am J 
Gastroenterol  2006 ; 101 : 2283 – 9 . 
368.  Kim  DH ,  Cheon  JH ,  Moon  CM et al.  [Clinical effi  cacy of nonsurgical 
treatment of Crohn's disease-related intraabdominal abscess] .  Korean J 
Gastroenterol  2009 ; 53 : 29 – 35 
Management of Crohn’s Disease in Adults
© 2018 by the American College of Gastroenterology 
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
 
37
369.  Garcia  JC ,  Persky  SE ,  Bonis  PA et al.  Abscesses in Crohn's disease: 
outcome of medical versus surgical treatment .  J Clin Gastroenterol 
 2001 ; 32 : 409 – 12 . 
370.  Chan  HC ,  Ng  SC. .  Emerging biologics in infl ammatory bowel disease . 
 J Gastroenterol  2017 ; 52 : 141 – 50 . 
371.  Sands  BE. .  Leukocyte anti-traffi  cking strategies: current status and future 
directions .  Dig Dis  2017 ; 35 : 13 – 20 . 
372.  Feagan  BG ,  Sandborn  WJ ,  D'Haens  G et al.  Induction therapy with the 
selective interleukin-23 inhibitor risankizumab in patients with 
moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled phase 2 study .  Lancet  2017 ; 389 : 1699 – 709 . 
373.  Sands  BE ,  Chen  J ,  Feagan  BG et al.  Effi  cacy and safety of MEDI2070, 
an antibody against interleukin 23, in patients with moderate to severe 
Crohn's disease: a phase 2a study .  Gastroenterology  2017 ; 153 : 77 – 86.e6 . 
374.  Vermeire  S ,  Schreiber  S ,  Petryka  R et al.  Clinical remission in patients 
with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease treated with fi lgotinib (the 
FITZROY study): results from a phase 2, double-blind, randomised, 
placebo-controlled trial .  Lancet  2017 ; 389 : 266 – 75 . 
375.  Sandborn  WJ ,  Feagan  BG ,  Panes  J et al.  Safety and effi  cacy of ABT-494 
(upadacitinib), an oral JAK1 inhibitor, as induction therapy in patients 
with Crohn’s disease; results from CELEST (abstract) .  Gastroenterology 
 2017 ; 152 : S1308 – S1309 . 
 
