Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3RQIKUrpuF/8trnhjhkg0Cnl84CZ9mTZr1JijOwub+Tc= on 03/06/2019
ACG Clinical Guideline: Ulcerative Colitis in Adults
David T. Rubin, MD, FACG1, Ashwin N. Ananthakrishnan, MD, MPH2, Corey A. Siegel, MD, MS3,
Bryan G. Sauer, MD, MSc (Clin Res), FACG (GRADE Methodologist)4 and Millie D. Long, MD, MPH, FACG5
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an idiopathic inflammatory disorder. These guidelines indicate the preferred approach to the
management of adults with UC and represent the official practice recommendations of the American College of
Gastroenterology. The scientific evidence for these guidelines was evaluated using the Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) process. In instances where the evidence was not appropriate for
GRADE, but there was consensus of significant clinical merit, “key concept” statements were developed using expert
consensus. These guidelines are meant to be broadly applicable and should be viewed as the preferred, but not only,
approach to clinical scenarios.
Am J Gastroenterol 2019;114:384–413. https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000000152; published online February 22, 2019
INTRODUCTION
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic disease aﬀecting the large
intestine, with an increasing incidence worldwide. Nearly 1 mil-
lion individuals each in the United States and Europe are aﬀected
by this condition and many more globally. Over the past decade,
since the publication of the last guideline from the American
College of Gastroenterology (ACG) on this topic, the manage-
ment of disease has grown increasingly complex with availability
of additional therapeutic classes. In addition, algorithms for ini-
tiating, optimizing, and monitoring response to existing therapies
have undergone considerable evolution.
UC is a chronic immune-mediated inﬂammatory condition
of the large intestine that is frequently associated with in-
ﬂammation of the rectum but often extends proximally to in-
volve additional areas of the colon. The absence of rectal
involvement has been noted in fewer than 5% of adult patients
with UC at diagnosis but may be seen in up to one-third of
pediatric-onset colitis (1). The initial presentation of new UC is
characterized by symptoms of an inﬂamed rectum, namely,
bleeding, urgency, and tenesmus (a sense of pressure). The
condition may present at any time and at all ages, but there is
a predominant age distribution of onset that peaks between
ages 15 and 30 years. The pattern of disease activity is most
often described as relapsing and remitting, with symptoms of
active disease alternating with periods of clinical quiescence,
which is called remission. Some patients with UC have per-
sistent disease activity despite diagnosis and medical therapy,
and a small number of patients present with the rapid-onset
progressive type of colitis known as fulminant disease (2,3).
UC causes signiﬁcant morbidity and a described low incidence
of mortality (4,5). Patients with active disease are more likely to
have comorbid psychological conditions of anxiety and depression
and are more likely to have impaired social interactions or career
progression(6).Long-standing UCisalso associated with a deﬁned
risk of dysplasia and colorectal cancer, which is believed to be
related to long-standing unchecked inﬂammation (7–10).
Management of UC must involve a prompt and accurate di-
agnosis, assessment of the patient’s risk of poor outcomes, and
initiation of eﬀective, safe, and tolerable medical therapies. The
optimal goal of management is a sustained and durable period of
steroid-free remission, accompanied by appropriate psychosocial
support, normal health-related quality oflife (QoL), prevention of
morbidity including hospitalization and surgery, and prevention of
cancer. An emerging goal in UC management is that of mucosal
healing. To achieve these goals, understanding of the most eﬀective
diagnostic, treatment, and preventive strategies is necessary (11). As
with any medical decision making, involvement of the patients’
preferences forms an important component of care.
This clinical guideline addresses the diagnosis, treatment, and
overallmanagementofadultpatientswithUC,includinganapproach
to the evaluation of the hospitalized patient and a separate section on
colorectal cancer prevention.Additional recommendations regarding
preventive care in inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) have been
published by the ACG previously (12).
The guideline is structured in sections, each with recom-
mendations, key concept statements, and summaries of the evi-
dence. Each recommendation statement has an associated
assessment of the quality of evidence and strength of recommen-
dation based on the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) process. The GRADE
system was used to evaluate the quality of supporting evidence
(Table 1) (13). A “strong” recommendation is made when the
beneﬁtsclearlyoutweighthenegativesand/ortheresultofnoaction.
“Conditional” is used when some uncertainty remains about the
balance of beneﬁts and potential harms. The quality of the evidence
is graded from high to low. “High”-quality evidence indicates that
further research is unlikely to change the authors’ conﬁdence in the
estimate of eﬀect and that we are very conﬁdent that the true eﬀect
1Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; 2Division of Gastroenterology, Crohn’s and Colitis Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital,Boston,MA,USA; 3SectionofGastroenterologyandHepatology,Dartmouth-HitchcockMedicalCenter,Lebanon,NH,USA; 4DepartmentofMedicine,University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 5Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Correspondence: Millie D. Long, MD, MPH, FACG. E-mail: millie_long@med.unc.edu; David T. Rubin, MD, FACG. E-mail: drubin@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.
Received June 29, 2018; accepted January 9, 2019
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
384
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
lies close to that of the estimate of the eﬀect. “Moderate”-quality
evidence is associated with moderate conﬁdence in the eﬀect esti-
mate, although further research would be likely to have an impact
on the conﬁdence of the estimate, whereas “low”-quality evidence
indicates that further study would likely have an important impact
on the conﬁdence in the estimate of the eﬀect and would likely
change the estimate. “Very low”–quality evidence indicates very
little conﬁdence in the eﬀect estimate and that the true eﬀect is likely
to be substantially diﬀerent than the estimate of eﬀect.
Key concepts are statements that are not amenable to the
GRADE process, either because of the structure of the state-
ment or because of the available evidence. In some instances,
key concepts are based on extrapolation of evidence and/or
expert opinion.
Tables 2 and 3 summarize the GRADED recommendations
and key concept statements in this guideline.
DIAGNOSIS, ASSESSMENT, AND PROGNOSIS OF
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Key concept statements
1. The diagnosis of UC should be suspected in patients with
hematochezia and urgency.
2. Infectious etiologies should be excluded at the time of diagnosis.
3. Colonoscopy with intubation of the ileum and biopsies of affected
and unaffected areas should be obtained to confirm the diagnosis
of UC by a trained pathologist with expertise in gastrointestinal
pathology when possible.
4. Categories of disease extent include (i) proctitis (within 18 cm
of the anal verge, distal to the rectosigmoid junction), (ii) left-
sided colitis (extending from the sigmoid to the splenic flexure),
and (iii) extensive colitis (beyond the splenic flexure).
5. If the terminal ileum is normal, further evaluation of the stomach
and small bowel by upper endoscopy and cross-sectional imaging
is not needed unless there are other symptoms or findings to
suggest proximal GI involvement or a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease
(CD) rather than UC.
6. Definitions of disease severity are needed to guide treatment
decisions; definitions should be based on (i) patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) (bleeding and normalization of bowel habits),
(ii) inflammatory burden (endoscopic assessment including
extent and severity and markers of inflammation), (iii) disease
course (need for hospitalization, need for steroids, and failure to
respond to medications), and (iv) disease impact (functionality
and QoL).
7. Fecal calprotectin (FC) can be used in patients with UC as
a noninvasive marker of disease activity and to assess response to
therapy and relapse.
Recommendations
1. We recommend stool testing to rule out Clostridioides difficile
(C. diff) in patients suspected of having UC (strong
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
2. We recommend against serologic antibody testing to establish or
rule out a diagnosis of UC (strong recommendation, very low quality
of evidence).
3. We recommend against serologic antibody testing to determine the
prognosis of UC (strong recommendation, very low quality of
evidence).
Summary of evidence
Symptoms of bloody diarrhea, mu-
cous, urgency, tenesmus, and abdominal cramping should trigger
consideration of a UC diagnosis, particularly in the absence of an
alternate cause. A full clinical history should include assessment
Table 1. Quality assessment criteriaa
Study design
Quality of evidence
Lower if
Higher if
Randomized trial
High
Risk of bias
Large effect
21 serious
11 large
22 very serious
12 very large
Moderate
Inconsistency
Dose-response
21 serious
11 evidence of a gradient
22 very serious
Indirectness
All plausible confounding
21 serious
11 would reduce a demonstrated effect or
22 very serious
11 would suggest a spurious effect when
results show no effect
Observational trial
Low
Imprecision
21 serious
22 very serious
Very low
Publication bias
21 likely
22 very likely
aSee Reference 13.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
385
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Table 2. Summary and strength of GRADED recommendations for the management of ulcerative colitis
Diagnosis, assessment, and prognosis of ulcerative colitis
1. We recommend stool testing to rule out Clostridioides difficile in patients suspected of having UC (strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
2. We recommend against serologic antibody testing to establish or rule out a diagnosis of UC (strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
3. We recommend against serologic antibody testing to determine the prognosis of UC (strong recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Goals for managing patients with ulcerative colitis
4. We suggest treating patients with UC to achieve mucosal healing (defined as resolution of inflammatory changes (Mayo endoscopic subscore 0 or 1)) to
increase the likelihood of sustained steroid-free remission and prevent hospitalizations and surgery (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
5. Wesuggest FC as a surrogate for endoscopy when endoscopy is not feasible or available to assess for mucosal healing (conditional recommendation, very low
quality of evidence).
Induction of remission in mildly active ulcerative colitis
6. In patients with mildly active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend rectal 5-ASA therapies at a dose of 1 g/d for induction of remission (strong recommendation,
high quality evidence).
7. In patients with mildly active left-sided colitis, we recommend rectal 5-ASA enemas at a dose of at least 1 g/d preferred over rectal steroids for induction of
remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
8. In patients with mildly active left-sided UC, we suggest rectal 5-ASA enemas at a dose of at least 1 g/d combined with oral 5-ASA at a dose of at least
2 g/d compared with oral 5-ASA therapy alone for induction of remission (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
9. In patients with mildly active left-sided UC who are intolerant or nonresponsive to oral and rectal 5-ASA at appropriate doses (oral at least 2 g/d and rectal at
least 1 g/d), we recommend oral budesonide MMX 9 mg/d for induction of remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
10. In patients with mildly active extensive colitis, oral 5-ASA at a dose of at least 2 g/d is recommended to induce remission (strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence).
11. In patients with UC of any extent who fail to respond to 5-ASA therapy, we recommend oral systemic corticosteroids to induce remission (strong
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
12. In patients with mildly active UC who fail to reach remission with appropriately dosed 5-ASA (at least 2 g/d oral 5-ASA and/or at least 1 g/d rectal 5-ASA), we
suggest against changing to an alternate 5-ASA formulation to induce remission. Alternative therapeutic classes should be considered (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
13. In patients with mildly active UC of any extent, we suggest using a low dose (2–2.4 g/d) of 5-ASA compared with a higher dose (4.8 g/d), as there is no
difference in the remission rate (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
14. In patients with mildly to moderately active UC not responding to oral 5-ASA, we recommend the addition of budesonide MMX 9 mg/d to induce remission
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
15. In patients with mildly to moderatelyactive UC ofany extent using 5-ASA to induce remission, we recommend either once-daily ormore frequently dosed oral
5-ASA based on patient preference to optimize adherence, as efficacy and safety are no different (strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence).
Maintenance of remission in patients with previously mildly active ulcerative colitis
16. In patients with mildly active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend rectal 5-ASA at a dose of 1 g/d to maintain remission (strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence).
17. In patients with mildly active left-sided or extensive UC, we recommend oral 5-ASA therapy (at least 2 g/d) for maintenance of remission (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
18. We recommend against systemic corticosteroids for maintenance of remission in patients with UC (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Induction of remission in moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis
19. In patients with moderately active UC, we recommend oral budesonide MMX for induction of remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
20. In patients with moderately to severely active UC of any extent, we recommend oral systemic corticosteroids to induce remission (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
21. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend against monotherapy with thiopurines or methotrexate for induction of remission (strong
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
22. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab, golimumab, or infliximab for induction of remission
(strong recommendation, high quality of evidence).
23. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have failed 5-ASA therapy and in whom anti-TNF therapy is used for induction of remission, we suggest
against using 5-ASA for added clinical efficacy (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
24. When infliximab is used as induction therapy for patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend combination therapy with a thiopurine
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence for azathioprine).
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
386
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Table 2. (continued)
25. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend vedolizumab for induction of remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
26. In patients with moderatelyto severely active UCwho have previously failed anti-TNF therapy, werecommendvedolizumabfor induction ofremission(strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
27. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend tofacitinib 10 mg orally b.i.d. for 8 wk to induce remission (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
28. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have previously failed anti-TNF therapy, we recommend tofacitinib for induction of remission (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
29. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who are responders to anti-TNF therapy and now losing response, we suggest measuring serum drug levels
and antibodies (if there is not a therapeutic level) to assess the reason for loss of response (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Maintenance of remission in patients with previously moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis
30. In patients with previously moderately to severely active UC who have achieved remission but previously failed 5-ASA therapy and are now on anti-TNF therapy,
we recommend against using concomitant 5-ASA for efficacy of maintenance of remission (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
31. We recommend against systemic corticosteroids for maintenance of remission in patients with UC (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
32. For patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in remission due to corticosteroid induction, we suggest thiopurines for maintenance of
remission compared with no treatment or corticosteroids (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
33. In patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in remission, we recommend against using methotrexate for maintenance of remission
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
34. We recommend continuing anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab, golimumab, or infliximab to maintain remission after anti-TNF induction in patients with
previously moderately to severely active UC (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
35. We recommend continuing vedolizumab to maintain remission in patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in remission after
vedolizumab induction (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
36. We recommend continuing tofacitinib for maintenance of remission in patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in remission after
induction with tofacitinib (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Management of the hospitalized patient with acute severe ulcerative colitis
37. In patients with ASUC, we recommend DVT prophylaxis to prevent VTE (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
38. In patients with ASUC, we recommend testing for CDI (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
39. In patients with ASUC and concomitant CDI, we recommend treatment of CDI with vancomycin instead of metronidazole (strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
40. We recommend against the routine use of broad-spectrum antibiotics in the management of ASUC (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
41. We suggest against total parenteral nutrition for the purpose of bowel rest in ASUC (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
42. In patients with ASUC, we recommend a total of 60 mg/d of methylprednisolone or hydrocortisone 100 mg 3 or 4 times per day to induce remission (strong
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
43. In patients with ASUC failing to adequately respond to intravenous corticosteroids by 3–5 days we recommend medical rescue therapy with infliximab or
cyclosporine (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
44. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with infliximab treatment, we recommend maintenance of remission with the same agent (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
45. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission with thiopurines (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
46. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission with vedolizumab (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Colorectal cancer prevention in ulcerative colitis
47. We suggest colonoscopic screening and surveillance to identify neoplasia in patients with UC of any extent beyond the rectum (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
48. When using standard-definition colonoscopes in patients with UC undergoing surveillance, we recommend dye spray chromoendoscopy with methylene
blue or indigo carmine to identify dysplasia (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
49. When using high-definition colonoscopes in patients with UC undergoing surveillance, we suggest white-light endoscopy with narrow-band imaging or dye
spray chromoendoscopy with methylene blue or indigo carmine to identify dysplasia (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
5-aminosalicylate, 5-ASA; ASUC, acute severe ulcerative colitis; CDI, Clostridioides difficile infection; FC, fecal calprotectin; MMX, multi-matrix; TNF, tumor necrosis factor;
VTE, venous thromboembolism; UC, ulcerative colitis.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
387
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Table 3. Summary of key concept statements for the management of ulcerative colitis
Diagnosis, assessment, and prognosis of ulcerative colitis
1. The diagnosis of UC should be suspected in patients with hematochezia and urgency.
2. Infectious etiologies should be excluded at the time of diagnosis.
3. Colonoscopy with intubation of the ileum and biopsies of affected and unaffected areas should be obtained to confirm the diagnosis of UC by a trained
pathologist with expertise in gastrointestinal pathology when possible.
4. Categories of disease extent include (i) proctitis (within 18 cm of the anal verge, distal to the rectosigmoid junction), (ii) left-sided colitis (extending from the
sigmoid to the splenic flexure), and (iii) extensive colitis (beyond the splenic flexure).
5. If the terminal ileum is normal, further evaluation of the stomach and small bowel by upper endoscopy and cross-sectional imaging is not needed unless there
are other symptoms or findings to suggest proximal gastrointestinal involvement or a diagnosis of CD rather than UC.
6. Definitions of disease severity are needed to guide treatment decisions; definitions should be based on (i) PROs (bleeding and normalization of bowel habits),
(ii) inflammatory burden (endoscopic assessment including extent and severity and markers of inflammation), (iii) disease course (need for hospitalization,
need for steroids, and failure to respond to medications), and (iv) disease impact (functionality and QoL).
7. FC can be used in patients with UC as a noninvasive marker of disease activity and to assess response to therapy and relapse.
Goals for managing patients with ulcerative colitis
8. UC is a chronic condition for which therapy is required to induce and maintain remission; therapeutic decisions should be categorized into those for (i)
induction and (ii) maintenance, with a goal of obtaining and maintaining a steroid-free remission.
9. Strategies for management of UC should reflect the patient’s and provider’s goals and recognize the chronic nature of the disease.
10. Corticosteroid-free remission may be defined based on symptoms, endoscopic findings, or disease impact without ongoing corticosteroid use. Symptomatic
remission relates to improvement in PROs, whereas endoscopic healing is defined as restoration of intact mucosa without friability. Deep remission is
a combination of symptomatic remission and endoscopic healing and is a preferred goal of management.
11. Selection of induction and maintenance therapies for UC should be based on disease extent, severity, and prognosis.
12. Initial treatment of UC should focus on restoration of normal bowel frequency and control of the primary symptoms of bleeding and urgency. An
endoscopically healed mucosa is associated with sustained remission and reduced risk of colectomy.
13. Histological healing is associated with some improved clinical outcomes but has not yet been validated prospectively as an end point of treatment.
14. Control of mucosal inflammation may reduce dysplasia risk.
15. Given the chronic nature of UC and the therapies for UC, monitoring for disease-related and drug-related complications is important. This should
incorporate preventive strategies as outlined in a separate guideline from the ACG.
16. Routine visits to assess the state of UC are recommended to monitor for relapse and address health maintenance needs.
17. Patients with UC should be screened for coexistent anxiety and depressive disorders, and when identified, patients should be provided with resources to
address these conditions.
Induction of remission in mildly active ulcerative colitis
18. Patients with mildly active UC and a number of prognostic factors associated with an increased risk of hospitalization or surgery should be treated with
therapies for moderately to severely active disease (Table 8). Each prognostic factor carries a different weight and must be discussed in a shared
decision-making fashion with the patient. For example, age alone is a weaker prognostic factor than severe endoscopic activity. However, young age combined
with another factor may represent sufficient criteria to treat according to the moderately to severely active disease protocol.
19. Patients with mildly active UC should be reassessed to determine response to induction therapy within 6 weeks.
20. FMT requires more study and clarification of treatment before use as a therapy for UC.
21. Complementary therapies such as probiotics and curcumin require further study with adequate power and clarification of end points.
Induction of remission in moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis
22. Strategies for the management of the nonhospitalized patient with moderately to severely active UC are similar with the exception of a few considerations in
which the data exist specifically for a patient with moderately active UC:
a. 5-ASA therapy could be used as monotherapy for induction of moderately but not severely active UC.
b. In patients with moderately active UC, consider nonsystemic corticosteroids such as budesonide MMX before the use of systemic therapy.
c. In patients with severely active UC, consider systemic corticosteroids rather than topical corticosteroids.
23. Robust data on combination anti-TNF and immunomodulator therapy in moderately to severely active UC exist only for infliximab and thiopurines.
24. Patients who are primary nonresponders to an anti-TNF (defined as lack of therapeutic benefit after induction despite adequate drug levels) should be
evaluated and considered for alternative mechanisms of disease control (e.g., in a different class of therapy) rather than cycling to another drug within the
anti-TNF class.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
388
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Table 3. (continued)
25. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who had an initial response but subsequently lost efficacy to one anti-TNF therapy, we recommend
alternative anti-TNF therapy (but not the biosimilar to the original brand) compared with no treatment for induction of remission.
26. The patient with nonresponse or loss of response to therapy should be assessed with therapeutic drug monitoring to identify the reason for lack of response
and whether to optimize the existing therapy or to select an alternate therapy.
27. Obtain consultation with a surgeon and consider colectomy in patients with moderately to severely active UC who are refractory or intolerant to medical
therapy.
Maintenance of remission in patients with previously moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis
28. 5-ASA therapy for maintenance of remission is likely not as effective in previously severely active UC compared with previously moderately active UC.
29. Budesonide MMX has not been studied for maintenance of remission of previously moderately to severely active UC.
30. Most clinical trials and available data demonstrate a benefit of using the steroid-sparing therapy that induces remission to maintain that remission.
31. There is insufficient evidence supporting a benefit for proactive therapeutic drug monitoring in all unselected patients with UC in remission.
32. We suggest elective proctocolectomy in patients with UC failing maximal medical management.
Management of the hospitalized patient with acute severe ulcerative colitis
33. All patients admitted with ASUC should have stool testing to rule out CDI.
34. All patients with ASUC should undergo a flexible sigmoidoscopy within 72 hr, and preferably within 24 hr of admission. This should be used to assess
endoscopic severity of inflammation and to obtain biopsies to evaluate for CMV colitis.
35. All patients with ASUC should be assessed for the presence of toxic megacolon on a regular basis during the hospital admission.
36. Response in patients with ASUC should be monitored using stool frequency, rectal bleeding, physical examination, vital signs, and serial CRP
measurements.
37. NSAIDs, opioids, and medications with anticholinergic side effects should be avoided in ASUC.
38. In patients failing to adequately respond to medical therapy by 3–5 days or with suspected toxicity, surgical consultation should be obtained.
39. The choice between infliximab and cyclosporine should be based on provider experience with the agent, history of previous failure of immunomodulator or
anti-TNF therapy, and serum albumin.
40. Toxic megacolon, colonic perforation, severe refractory hemorrhage, and refractoriness to medical therapy are indications for surgery in patients with ASUC.
41. Infliximab and cyclosporine do not increase postoperative complications of colectomy, and surgery should not be deferred based on this exposure.
Colorectal cancer prevention in ulcerative colitis
42. Screening and subsequent surveillance colonoscopy to assess for dysplasia in individuals with UC of extent greater than the rectum should start 8 years after
diagnosis.
43. Patients with UC and PSC should undergo a screening colonoscopy at the time of diagnosis of UC and surveillance annually thereafter.
44. Surveillance colonoscopies in patients with UC should be performed at 1- to 3-year intervals based on the combined risk factors for CRC in UC and the
findings on previous colonoscopy. Specific interval should be based on combined risk factors and findings from previous examinations.
45. During colonoscopic examination in patients with UC, the endoscopist should identify raised lesions and abnormal pit patterns and perform targeted
biopsies. Endoscopically discrete lesions should be removed, clearly labeling and separating distinct lesions and segments of the colorectum.
46. Most neoplasia in UC is visible with standard- or high-definition white-light examinations.
47. It is unclear whether segmental random biopsies are still required during surveillance colonoscopy in UC.
48. Pathologic interpretation of UC-associated neoplasia should be performed by a pathologist experienced in gastrointestinal pathology, and neoplastic
findings should be reviewed by a second experienced pathologist.
49. When dysplasia in UC of any grade is discrete and has been completely removed, proctocolectomy may not be necessary. If surgery is not performed,
subsequent surveillance colonoscopy should initially be performed at shortened intervals.
50. When dysplasia in UC is not resectable or is multifocal, the patient should be referred for proctocolectomy.
51. Patients with UC who have extensive inflammatory polyps may not be able to have adequate surveillance and should be informed about this fact and that
more frequent surveillance or surgery may be required.
52. No medical therapy has demonstrated sufficient prevention of dysplasia or CRC to avoid colonoscopic surveillance in UC.
53. Patients with UC-associated dysplasia who are undergoing ongoing active surveillance may benefit from the use of augmented visualization by dye spray
chromoendoscopy in their first examination after UC-associated dysplasia was detected.
54. Fecal DNA testing and CTcolonography are not recommended for screening or surveillance of UC-associated neoplasia because of insufficient evidence.
5-aminosalicylate, 5-ASA; ACG, American College of Gastroenterology; ASUC, acute severe ulcerative colitis; CD, Crohn’s disease; CDI, Clostridioides difficile infection;
CMV, cytomegalovirus; CRC, colorectal cancer; CRP, C-reactive protein; CT, computed tomography; DVT, deep venous thrombosis; FC, fecal calprotectin; FMT, fecal
microbiota transplantation; MMX, multi-matrix; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PRO, patient-reported outcome; PSC, primary sclerosing cholangitis; QoL,
quality of life; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; UC, Ulcerative colitis.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
389
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
of severity of disease, triggers precipitating onset, and potential
alternate etiologies. Symptoms assessed should include frequency
of bowel movements, including number of nocturnal bowel
movements. Assessment of bleeding should include the pro-
portion of bowel movements that are mixed with blood. Other
important symptoms to assess include urgency, abdominal pain,
cramping, and weight loss, a marker of severity of disease. In
addition, a thorough history should assess the presence of
extraintestinal manifestations, including joint, skin, ocular, and
oral manifestations, and symptoms suggesting hepatobiliary in-
volvement. Potential precipitants of UC may include recent
smoking cessation (14), nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug
(NSAID) use (15,16), and enteric infections (17). C. diﬀinfection
(CDI) is increasingly recognized as complicating a signiﬁcant
proportion of patients with UC and is associated with an in-
creased risk of hospitalizations, surgery, and even mortality
(18,19). The prevalence of CDI among patients with newly di-
agnosed or relapsing IBD ranges from 5% to 47%. Concomitant
CDI with UC has worse outcomes including higher mortality
(20,21). Testing for C. diﬀis typically performed by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and has been reviewed in recent guidelines (22). Other
enteric infections that could mimic UC include infection with
Escherichia coli (E. coli O157:H7), Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia,
and Campylobacter and parasitic infections such as amebiasis in
the right clinical setting. Therefore, an infectious etiology should
always be suspected and excluded at the time of diagnosis in the
right clinical setting. Several institutions use comprehensive in-
testinal pathogen testing through PCR-based assays that include
many bacterial and viral pathogens. The prevalence and impact of
non–C. diﬀintestinal pathogens detected through such assays
remain to be robustly established, with initial results suggesting C.
diﬀto be the predominant infectious determinant of adverse
outcomes in patients with IBD (23).
The diagnosis of UC requires a lower gastrointestinal endo-
scopic examination with histologic conﬁrmation. For most
patients, a complete colonoscopy including examination of the
terminal ileum should be performed. This allows for assessment
of the full extent of disease at diagnosis and can rule out distal ileal
involvement, which can be seen with CD. Subsequent examina-
tions can then assess response to therapy. However, in individuals
with severe disease, a complete colonoscopy may be associated
with a greater risk of perforation, and in this case, a sigmoidos-
copy with biopsies is suﬃcient. Endoscopically, UC most often
presents as a continuously inﬂamed segment involving the distal
rectum and extending proximally. Endoscopic features of in-
ﬂammation include loss of vascular markings, granularity and
friability of the mucosa, erosions, and, in the setting of severe
inﬂammation, deep ulcerations and spontaneous bleeding. The
index colonoscopy should note involvement of the rectum and
complete extent of inﬂammation. Proximal histologic extension
may be seen even in endoscopically normal-appearing colon and
may have implications for deﬁning the extent of disease and
subsequent surveillance intervals. Therefore, biopsies should be
obtained from the proximal endoscopically normal-appearing
colon even if the inﬂamed segment appears to be restricted to the
distal colon. Similarly, even if the distal rectum appears endo-
scopically normal, separate biopsies from the rectum should be
obtained because patchy histologic inﬂammation may be seen in
5%–30% of children with UC despite the absence of endoscopi-
cally visible inﬂammation (24).
Routine upper endoscopic evaluation is not required in adults
with a new diagnosis of UC and should be restricted to those with
symptoms of upper gastrointestinal disease. While in the pedi-
atric population, up to 8% of children with UC may have their
diagnosis modiﬁed to CD based on upper endoscopic ﬁndings
(25), such occurrences are less frequent in adult-onset disease
(26). Gastritis and erosions may be seen in up to one-third of
patients with UC (27). Imaging the small bowel with computed
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging is also not
routinely required in all patients with normal appearance of the
terminal ileum on colonoscopy. However, in those with ab-
dominal symptoms not explained by endoscopically active dis-
ease, with suspicion of CD (such as predominantly watery
diarrhea, weight loss, or abdominal pain), or where proximal
extent of involvement cannot be evaluated because of severity of
inﬂammation, CT, magnetic resonance imaging, or video capsule
endoscopy may be useful.
Once a diagnosis of UC is made, determining the severity of
disease becomes important. We have proposed new deﬁnitions of
mildly, moderately, and severely active disease that incorporate
both PROs and laboratory- and endoscopy-based values (Table 4
and Figure 1).
Active UC is frequently marked by an elevation in C-reactive
protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (28,29).
Although such markers are nonspeciﬁc and may be elevated with
other causes of systemic inﬂammation, they often correlate with
the endoscopic severity of disease (30). Such markers also have
prognostic signiﬁcance and have a role in predicting the risk of
colectomy (31–33) and response to therapy (32–34). However, up
to a quarter of patients with endoscopically active disease may
have a normal CRP, and the frequency of elevation is lower in
individuals with mild endoscopic activity. Measurement of he-
moglobin and serum albumin levels at diagnosis can be helpful in
assessing disease severity and prognosis.
Demonstration of fecal leukocytes alone is not suﬃciently
sensitive, nor is it speciﬁc for the diagnosis or assessment of the
activity of UC. FC is a nonspeciﬁc neutrophilic marker of in-
ﬂammation and is elevated in infectious and inﬂammatory
colitis but not in noninﬂammatory causes of diarrhea such as
irritable bowel syndrome. Several studies have conﬁrmed its
utility in diﬀerentiating IBD from irritable bowel syndrome
using cutoﬀs that vary from 6 to 280 mg/g of stool (35). The
pooled sensitivity and speciﬁcity of elevated FC for diagnosis of
UC are 0.88 and 0.79, respectively, with a modest positive
likelihood ratio of 4.2 and a more clinically meaningful negative
likelihood ratio of 0.15. In a primary care population, FC in
patients with suspected UC (diarrhea and rectal bleeding) can
be used to prioritize patients for colonoscopic evaluation,
particularly among children (36,37). The utility of FC as
a marker of inﬂammation and treatment target is discussed in
the management section.
Serologic markers such as perinuclear antineutrophil cyto-
plasmic antibodies (pANCAs) may be found in up to 70% of
patients
with
UC,
and
combination
of
negative
anti–
Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies with elevated pANCA levels
has been proposed to facilitate establishing a diagnosis of UC
(38,39). However, the pooled sensitivity of antibody testing for
diagnosis of UC is low, and such markers are not used for
establishing or ruling out a diagnosis of UC (38). Although
pANCA positivity has also been associated with treatment re-
fractory UC, the evidence supporting this is limited, and there is
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
390
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
currently no role for such testing to determine the likelihood of
disease evolution and prognosis (40,41).
Determination of the extent and severity of disease is impor-
tant to select the appropriate treatment algorithm. Extent of the
disease should be characterized according to the Montreal clas-
siﬁcation as proctitis (E1), left-sided colitis (E2), or extensive
colitis (E3) (extension proximal to the splenic ﬂexure) (42,43).
Commonly, severity of UC has been classiﬁed according to the
Truelove and Witts’ (44) criteria published in 1955. Mild colitis
is deﬁned as fewer than 4 bowel movements daily, normal
temperature, heart rate, hemoglobin (.11 g/dL), and ESR
(,20 mm/hr). Severe disease is deﬁned by bowel frequency
greater than 6 times a day in conjunction with fever, tachycardia,
anemia, or an elevation in ESR. Although simple to use and useful
in deﬁning the need for hospitalization, the index does not pro-
vide a quantitative or longitudinal measure of severity, excludes
other important symptoms such as nocturnal symptoms and
extraintestinal manifestations, and does not consider endoscopic
severity. Several quantitative disease activity indexes are available
(45), including the Mayo score (Table 5) (46), Seo Index (47),
Rachmilewitz Index (48), Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index
(SCCAI) (Table 6) (49), PRO2 (50), and the Pediatric UC Activity
Table 4. Proposed American College of Gastroenterology Ulcerative Colitis Activity Indexa
Remission
Mild
Moderate-severe
Fulminant
Stools (no./d)
Formed stools
,4
.6
.10
Blood in stools
None
Intermittent
Frequent
Continuous
Urgency
None
Mild, occasional
Often
Continuous
Hemoglobin
Normal
Normal
,75% of normal
Transfusion required
ESR
,30
,30
.30
.30
CRP (mg/L)
Normal
Elevated
Elevated
Elevated
FC (mg/g)
,150–200
.150–200
.150–200
.150–200
Endoscopy (Mayo subscore)
0–1
1
2–3
3
UCEIS
0–1
2–4
5–8
7–8
aModified from reference 44.
The above factors are general guides for disease activity. With the exception of remission, a patient does not need to have all the factors to be considered in a specific
category.
CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FC, fecal calprotectin; UCEIS, Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity.
Figure 1. Sample endoscopic images of ulcerative colitis using the Mayo endoscopic subscore (49) and the Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity
(41). (Images courtesy of David T. Rubin, MD.)
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
391
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Index (PUCAI) (51). Although disease extent broadly aﬀects
prognosis, it should not limit therapeutic options. Although most
clinical activity indexes have not been rigorously validated, there
is broad agreement between most of the indexes (52), and they
generally correlate well with endoscopic disease activity. In
a prospective comparison, the PUCAI, SCCAI, and partial Mayo
score demonstrated the best validity and responsiveness
(51,53,54). The PRO2 (derived from components of the Mayo
score) has been shown to discriminate between active drug and
placebo and yielded similar eﬀect sizes for remission when ap-
plied to previously collected clinical trial data. This has been
proposed as an interim outcome measure when combined with
endoscopic data (50). Ongoing eﬀorts also aim to develop and
validate PROs that incorporate patients’ perception of severity of
disease; (55) preliminary work suggests that such PROs correlate
well with established disease activity indexes and may improve
the ability to predict patient-deﬁned remission.
Previous deﬁnitions of disease severity have been used in
clinical trials but not in clinical practice. Inclusion criteria for
clinical trials of agents for moderately to severely active UC have
required components such as (i) inability to taper oﬀprednisone,
(ii) previous failure of immunosuppressants, and (iii) moderately
to severely active disease deﬁned by the Mayo score (including the
speciﬁc endoscopy subscore). In clinical trials, the deﬁnition of
remission has been a Mayo endoscopic subscore of 0 or 1 and lack
of rectal bleeding. In clinical practice, the previously used deﬁ-
nitions of remission refer to clinical parameters of current relapse
(number of bowel movements, bleeding, and evidence of toxicity
such as vital signs or colonic dilation) but do not include objective
parameters of increased disease activity other than CRP (which
lacks sensitivity). These measures also do not place the current
ﬂare in the context of the previous disease course as this guideline
now recommends. In addition, when using a newer disease ac-
tivity deﬁnition that takes into account disease course, any patient
with more than mildly active disease should be treated according
to recommendations for moderately to severely active UC.
In the absence of endoscopy, other objective markers of in-
ﬂammation can be considered such as normalization of CRP and
FC. More recent measures of remission now include symptomatic
remission (no rectal bleeding and no urgency) and endoscopic
evidence of mucosal healing. Retrospective data have investigated
histologic remission as a potential therapeutic target and have
shown histologic quiescence and histologic normalization to be
predictive of relapse-free survival (56). However, only a small
percentage of patients seem to reach these end points. The
available data do not yet support histologic healing or normali-
zation as a goal of treatment for patients with UC.
With increasing recognition of endoscopic mucosal response
and remission as treatment targets and their prognostic
Table 5. Mayo score for ulcerative colitis activitya
Parameter
Subscore (0–3)
Stool frequency
0 5 normal number of stools
1 5 1–2 stools more than normal
2 5 3–4 stools more than normal
3 5 5 or more stools more than normal
Rectal bleeding
0 5 no blood seen
1 5 streaks of blood with stool less than one-
half of the time
2 5 obvious blood with stool most of the time
3 5 blood alone passed without stool
Findings on endoscopy
0 5 normal or inactive disease
1 5 mild disease (erythema, decreased
vascular pattern, and mild friability)
2 5 moderate disease (marked erythema,
lack of vascular pattern, friability, and
erosions)
3 5 severe disease (spontaneous bleeding
and ulcerations)
Physician’s global
assessment
0 5 normal
1 5 mild disease
2 5 moderate disease
3 5 severe disease
aSee reference 42.
Table 6. Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Indexa
Symptom
Score
Bowel frequency (d)
1–3
0
4–6
1
7–9
2
91
3
Bowel frequency (night)
0
0
1–3
1
4–6
2
Urgency of defecation
None
0
Hurry
1
Immediate
2
Incontinence
3
Blood in stool
None
0
Trace
1
Occasionally frank
2
Usually frank
3
General well-being
Very well
0
Slightly below par
1
Poor
2
Very poor
3
Terrible
4
Extracolonic features
1 per manifestation
aSee reference 49.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
392
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
signiﬁcance for future relapses, need for hospitalization, and
surgery, it isessential to include endoscopic severity assessment in
the diagnosis and management of UC (57,58). There are several
tools to quantify endoscopic activity in UC, although few have
been rigorously validated (59). The Mayo endoscopic score is
frequently used in clinical trials and is simple to use in clinical
practice, ranging from 0 for normal or inactive disease to 3 for
severely active disease (46). Using a rigorous methodology for
derivation and validation using regression models and central
readings of recorded procedures, the UC Endoscopic Index of
Severity (UCEIS) has recently been proposed (Table 7) (38). This
score incorporates 3 items—vascular pattern, bleeding, and ero-
sions and ulcers, quantifying each on a scale of 0–3 (0–2 for
vascular pattern) for a total score ranging between 0 and 8. The
UCEIS demonstrated excellent correlation with disease severity
(60) and good intra- and inter-observer reliability (60,61). Pre-
liminary data suggest that this score is also responsive to therapy,
and improvement with treatment predicts medium- and long-
term outcomes (62). Table 4 summarizes the diﬀerent parameters
used in this guideline for the purpose of deﬁning mildly active and
moderately to severely active UC (44,63). Figure 1 shows
representative endoscopic photographs comparing the tradi-
tional Mayo endoscopic subscore and the UCEIS.
UC is also associated with psychosocial and economic dis-
ruption and disability. There are ongoing eﬀorts to quantify
such disability through validated indexes that correlate well
with disease severity and QoL (63–65). There are insuﬃcient
data to recommend the routine use of such scores in clinical
practice. However, it is important to include assessments of the
impact of the disease on the patients’ lives in the determination
of overall severity and selection of the appropriate treatment
algorithm.
Evaluation of UC during relapses should include assessment
of severity of symptoms and potential triggers, including enteric
infections (particularly C. diﬀ), NSAID use, and recent smoking
cessation. Nonadherence to therapy is common in patients with
UC and is associated with an increased risk of relapse and cost of
care (66,67). UC is an evolving disease, and the risk of disease
extension should be kept in mind in individuals with initially
localized disease, particularly with nonresponse to topical treat-
ment. Up to 46% of patients with proctitis and 70% with left-sided
colitis may develop extensive colitis on follow-up (68). It is im-
portant to recognize that endoscopic evaluation in individuals
with loss of response may reveal patchiness of endoscopic and
histologic activity including an appearance of relative rectal
sparing with the use of topical treatments.
A comprehensive assessment of severity of UC should include
predictors of an aggressive disease course, need for colectomy,
and response to therapies. Several prospective cohorts have ex-
amined the role of clinical parameters, genetics, and serologic
markers in predicting the need for colectomy in UC (69,70).
Extensive colitis, need for systemic steroids, young age at di-
agnosis, and elevated CRP or ESR are associated with higher rates
of colectomy (69,71). Patients with a previous hospitalization for
their UC are also at a higher risk of subsequent colectomy (72).
The yield of genetic or serologic markers in predicting severity
and course of UC has been modest at best, and their use cannot be
recommended in routine clinical practice based on available data
(40,41). Table 8 summarizes the factors associated with an in-
creased risk of colectomy and a poor prognosis (3).
Table 7: Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severitya
Descriptor
Likert scale anchor points
Definitions
Vascular pattern
0 5 normal
Normal vascular pattern with arborizations of capillaries clearly defined
1 5 patchy obliteration
Patchy obliteration of vascular pattern
2 5 obliterated
Complete loss of vascular pattern
Bleeding
0 5 none
No visible blood
1 5 mucosal
Spots or streaks of coagulated blood on the mucosa surface, which can be washed off
2 5 luminal mild
Some free liquid blood in the lumen
3 5 luminal moderate or severe
Frank blood in the lumen or visible oozing from the mucosa after washing or visible oozing from
a hemorrhagic mucosa
Erosions and ulcers
0 5 none
Normal mucosa, no visible ulcers or erosions
1 5 erosions
Small defects in the mucosa (#5 mm), white or yellow, flat edge
2 5 superficial ulcer
Larger defects in the mucosa (.5 mm), discrete fibrin covered, remain superficial
3 5 deep ulcer
Deeper excavated defects in the mucosa, with a slightly raised edge
aSee reference 35.
Table 8. Poor prognostic factors in ulcerative colitis disease
severity
Poor prognostic factors
Age ,40 yr at diagnosis
Extensive colitis
Severe endoscopic disease (Mayo endoscopic subscore 3, UCEIS $ 7)
Hospitalization for colitis
Elevated CRP
Low serum albumin
The greater the number of poor prognostic factors, the worse the prognosis as
measured by the likelihood of colectomy (4).
CRP, C-reactive protein; UCEIS, Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
393
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
GOALS FOR MANAGING PATIENTS WITH
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Key concept statements
8. UC is a chronic condition for which therapy is required to
induce and maintain remission; therapeutic decisions
should be categorized into those for (i) induction and
(ii) maintenance, with a goal of obtaining and maintaining
a steroid-free remission.
9. Strategies for management of UC should reflect the patient’s and
provider’s goals and recognize the chronic nature of the disease.
10. Corticosteroid-free remission may be defined based on
symptoms, endoscopic findings, or disease impact without
ongoing corticosteroid use. Symptomatic remission relates to
improvement in PROs, whereas endoscopic healing is defined
as restoration of intact mucosa without friability. Deep
remission is a combination of symptomatic remission and
endoscopic healing and is a preferred goal of management.
11. Selection of induction and maintenance therapies for UC should
be based on disease extent, severity, and prognosis.
12. Initial treatment of UC should focus on restoration of normal bowel
frequency and control of the primary symptoms of bleeding and
urgency. An endoscopically healed mucosa is associated with
sustained remission and reduced risk of colectomy.
13. Histologic remission is associated with some improved clinical
outcomes but has not yet been validated prospectively as an end
point of treatment.
14. Control of mucosal inflammation may reduce dysplasia risk.
15. Given the chronic nature of UC and the therapies for UC, monitoring
for disease-related and drug-related complications is important.
Thisshould incorporate preventivestrategies asoutlined here and in
a separate guideline from the ACG (12).
16. Routine visits are recommended to monitor for relapse and
address health maintenance needs.
17. Patients with UC should be screened for coexistent anxiety and
depressive disorders, and when identified, patients should be
provided with resources to address these conditions.
Recommendations
4. We suggest treating patients with UC to achieve mucosal healing
(defined as resolution of inflammatory changes (Mayo endoscopic
subscore 0 or 1)) to increase the likelihood of sustained steroid-free
remission and prevent hospitalizations and surgery (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
5. We suggest FC as a surrogate for endoscopy when endoscopy is not
feasible or available to assess for mucosal healing (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
Patients’ and providers’ goals may not
always align. Studies have identiﬁed disparities between QoL
measures as perceived by patients and their providers (73).
Symptoms alone should not be used as the only measure of re-
mission, and patients need to be educated about these concepts, as
symptomatic remission can lag behind healing (74). In addition,
a large portion of patients with UC have been shown to have
mucosal inﬂammation without clinical symptoms (75). There-
fore, it is important to rely on objective clinical targets and use
validated scores and instruments (including endoscopy) in
conﬁrming remission (60,76). According to Food and Drug
Administration guidance, a PRO involves the generation of
items from qualitative patient interviews and testing for re-
liability and responsiveness to changes in clinical health (77).
An optimized PRO derived from the Mayo score and the
SCCAI has been validated (55). Resolution of rectal bleeding
and urgency, normalization of bowel habits, and improve-
ment in general well-being should be the goal for patient-
reported symptoms.
Disease activity indexes used in clinical trials can be used to
deﬁne steroid-free remission. These include the Mayo score (46),
Rachmeliwitz Index (48), SCCAI (49), and PUCAI (54). Targets
have been deﬁned for the treatment of UC, and goals of therapy
should be directed at these targets. A treat-to-target approach
uses regular assessment of disease activity by using objective and
clinical biological outcome measures and the subsequent ad-
justment of treatments (78).
Therapeutic targets have been recommended for UC, as part
of the Selecting Therapeutic Targets in Inﬂammatory Bowel
Diseases (STRIDE) consensus statement, which was based on
a systematic literature review and expert opinion of 28 IBD
specialists. The targets for UC were composite end points that
include resolution of rectal bleeding, normalization of bowel
habits, and a Mayo endoscopic subscore of 0 or 1. STRIDE
proposed that these end points should be assessed at a mini-
mum every 3 months during the active phase of disease (79).
The STRIDE recommendations to set endoscopic remission as
a primary target were based on evidence that supports that the
degree of mucosal healing is correlated with clinical outcomes,
including avoiding colectomy (57,58,80). It is acknowledged
that endoscopic improvement (Mayo endoscopic subscore of
0 or 1) rather than complete healing (Mayo endoscopic sub-
score of 0) may be suﬃcient and associated with similar out-
comes (58).
At the time of the 2015 STRIDE statement, histology was not
identiﬁed as a target for treatment, but the research and under-
standing of this biomarker has evolved. Recent studies and critical
reviews of histology as a marker of disease activity and potential
end point of therapy demonstrate that the presence of active
microscopic inﬂammation (deﬁned by the presence of mucosal
neutrophils) is predictive of clinical relapse, hospitalization, and
steroid use (81). In addition, there are several signiﬁcant studies,
which demonstrate that the increased degree of histological in-
ﬂammation is associated with dysplasia and colorectal cancer
(also discussed below) (8–10). Although a speciﬁc index for
clinical use has not been clariﬁed, it is anticipated that further
work will clarify the value of this end point as a separate target for
management and prognosis. However, at this time, based on the
lack of clinical trial data and current levels of evidence, histologic
healing is not a recommended management end point.
There is a need for less invasive markers of inﬂammation. Such
markers can be used to assess for subclinical detection of disease
relapse, response to therapy, and distinction between in-
ﬂammatory andnoninﬂammatorycauses of symptoms.There are
studies exploring fecal lactoferrin, FC, and, more recently, fecal
immunohistochemical tests of hemoglobin (82). In general, these
fecal markers are better tools in UC than in CD, and the attrac-
tiveness of them is that they oﬀer less invasive and less resource-
intense ways to serially assess disease activity. The most data exist
for FC.
Calprotectin is an antimicrobial manganese sequestration
protein complex, which comprises 60% of the soluble proteins
in the cytosol of neutrophils (83). It is secreted by an unknown
mechanism during inﬂammation, is a stable protein in stool,
and quantiﬁcation of it is possible with commercially available
laboratory assays. FC levels correlate with degrees of
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
394
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
endoscopic and histologic inﬂammation in UC and therefore
have been proposed as a marker of disease activity to guide
treatment (83,84). FC levels are more sensitive and speciﬁc
than serum inﬂammatory markers and obviously also less
invasive than endoscopy or mucosal biopsies, so this assess-
ment has become routine for many clinicians who are man-
aging patients with UC (35,85). FC therefore has been
proposed as a monitoring tool to assess response to therapy or
subclinical relapse (86,87). Higher levels of FC correlate with
more endoscopically severe disease, but absolute levels may
not correlate with the colonic extent of inﬂammation. The
cutoﬀs for deﬁning clinical or endoscopic remission and as the
optimal therapeutic target have not been studied pro-
spectively and are thus not amenable to the GRADE process.
Relevant cutoﬀs will diﬀer based on whether studies of FC are
assessing (i) mucosal healing (by endoscopy or histology) or
(ii) clinical relapse and are limited by intrapatient variability
(88–90). In separate studies, FC , 60 mg/g and ,187 mg/g
predicted deep remission (88) and mucosal healing (89), re-
spectively, whereas an FC . 321 mg/g in clinical remission
predicted the risk of relapse at 6 and 12 months (91). As with
other inﬂammatory markers, the degree of elevation of FC
correlates with burden of inﬂammation, and values may be
normal or borderline in mild disease and may need to be re-
peated over time. A recent meta-analysis of 25 eligible studies
revealed that FC had a pooled sensitivity for endoscopic in-
ﬂammation in UC of 87.3%, with a speciﬁcity of 77.1% and
area under the curve of 0.91 (92). This analysis described that
the optimum cutoﬀvaried widely by studies, but that the best
sensitivity of 90% (87.9–92.9) was achieved at a cutoﬀlevel of
50 mg/g, whereas the best speciﬁcity of 78.2% (75.7–80.6) was
achieved for cutoﬀlevels greater than 100 mg/g (92). In an
individual patient, serial FC can be useful as a predictor of
response to therapy or relapse. This principle was demon-
strated in a phase 3 trial of tofacitinib for moderately to se-
verely active UC, in which serial FC levels were obtained. An
FC cutoﬀvalue of 150 mg/kg achieved the highest summation
of sensitivity and speciﬁcity for clinical remission (0.68 and
0.79, respectively; k coeﬃcient, 0.44) and endoscopic re-
mission (0.79 and 0.75, respectively; k coeﬃcient, 0.38). More
recently, FC levels have been correlated with histologic disease
activity as well (93). Further research into optimal cutoﬀs of
FC will guide clinical practice, but the available data support it
as an appropriate surrogate to sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
for assessment and monitoring of mucosal inﬂammation.
MANAGEMENT OF ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Therapeutic management in UC should be guided by the
speciﬁc diagnosis (i.e., Montreal classiﬁcation), an assessment
of disease activity (i.e., mild, moderate, or severe), and disease
prognosis. A distinction made in this updated guideline is that
treatment selection should be based not only on inﬂammatory
activity but also on disease prognosis. For example, a patient
who satisﬁes the criteria for mildly active disease but who has
steroid dependence and a previous hospitalization should be
evaluated for treatments typically recommended for patients
with moderately to severely active disease because their ste-
roid dependence and previous hospitalization have a signiﬁ-
cant impact on their disease prognosis.
Induction of remission in mildly active UC
Key concept statements
18. Patients with mildly active UC and a number of prognostic factors
associated with an increased risk of hospitalization or surgery
should be treated with therapies for moderately to severely active
disease (Table 8). Each prognostic factor carries a different weight
and must be discussed in a shared decision-making fashion with
the patient. For example, age alone is a weaker prognostic factor
than severe endoscopic activity. However, young age combined
with another factor may represent sufficient criteria to treat
according to the moderately to severely active disease protocol.
19. Patients with mildly active UC should be reassessed to determine
response to induction therapy within 6 weeks.
20. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) requires more study and
clarification of treatment before use as a therapy for UC.
21. Complementary therapies such as probiotics and curcumin require
further study with adequate power and clarification of end points.
Recommendations
6. In patients with mildly active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend
rectal 5-aminosalicylate therapies at a dose of 1 g/d for induction of
remission (strong recommendation, high-quality evidence).
7. In patients with mildly active left-sided UC, we recommend rectal
5-aminosalicylate enemas at a dose of at least 1 g/d preferred over
rectal steroids for induction of remission (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
8. In patients with mildly active left-sided UC, we suggest rectal 5-
aminosalicylate enemas at a dose of at least 1 g/d combined with
oral 5-aminosalicylate at adose of at least 2 g/d compared with oral
5-aminosalicylate therapy alone for induction of remission
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
9. In patients with mildly active left-sided UC who are intolerant or
nonresponsive to oral and rectal 5-aminosalicylate (5-ASA) at
appropriate doses (oral at least 2 g/d and rectal at least 1 g/d), we
recommend oral budesonidemulti-matrix (MMX) 9 mg/d for induction
of remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
10. In patients with mildly active extensive UC, oral 5-ASA at a dose
of at least 2 g/d is recommended to induce remission (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
11. In patients with UC of any extent who fail to respond to 5-ASA
therapy, we recommend oral systemic corticosteroids to induce
remission (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
12. In patients with mildly active UC who fail to reach remission with
appropriately dosed 5-ASA (at least 2 g/d oral 5-ASA and/or at least
1 g/d rectal 5-ASA), we suggest against changing to an alternate
5-ASA formulation to induce remission. Alternative therapeutic
classes should be considered (conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
13. In patients with mildly active UC of any extent, we suggest using
a low dose (2–2.4 g/d) of 5-ASA compared with a higher dose
(4.8 g/d), as there is no difference in the remission rate
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
14. In patients with mildly to moderately active UC not responding to oral
5-ASA, we recommend the addition of budesonide MMX 9 mg/d to
induce remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
15. In patients with mildly to moderately active UC of any extent using 5-
ASA to induce remission, we recommend either once-daily or more
frequently dosed oral 5-ASA based on patient preference to optimize
adherence, as efficacy and safety are no different (strong
recommendation, moderate quality evidence).
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
395
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Summary of evidence
A meta-analysis of 11 randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) of patients with UC treated with 5-ASA
for induction or maintenance demonstrated superiority of
5-ASAs in inducing remission compared with placebo (94). In
this analysis, patients receiving 5-ASA were more likely to achieve
remission. Only 60.3% of patients treated with 5-ASAs failed to
reach remission compared with 80.2% of patients treated with
placebo (risk ratio (RR), 0.79; conﬁdence interval (CI), 0.73–85;
P 5 0.009; number needed to treat 5 6). Eﬃcacy of 5-ASAs in
inducing remission was similar whether remission was deﬁned
clinically or endoscopically. Another meta-analysis of 38 studies
in patients with mildly to moderately active proctitis or left-sided
UC found that rectal 5-ASA was superior to placebo, with
a pooled odds ratio (OR) of 8.30 (95% CI, 4.28–16.12; P ,
0.00001) for symptomatic remission and 5.31 for endoscopic
remission (95% CI, 3.15–8.92; P , 0.00001). There were no sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences due to dose (1 or 4 g/d) or formulation (liquid,
gel, foam, or suppository) (95). Rectal 5-ASA was also found to be
superior to rectal corticosteroids for inducing symptomatic re-
mission (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.1–2.5) (95). Despite the superiority
of rectal 5-ASA over rectal steroids, steroids remain an important
option for patients with mildly active left-sided UC who cannot
retain rectal 5-ASA, have hypersensitivity to 5-ASA, or who are
not responding to 5-ASA (95).
In left-sided UC, a meta-analysis of 4 RCTs using combination
treatment with rectal 5-ASA enemas (1 g/d) combined with oral
5-aminosalicylate (at least 2 g/d) was more eﬀective than oral 5-
ASA alone for induction of remission (relative risk induction
failure RR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.47–0.91) (96). Another meta-analysis
comparing the 2 regimens showed an RR of 0.86 for induction
failure when using the combination therapy (95% CI, 0.81–0.91)
(97). However, in patients with mildly active extensive colitis, oral
5-ASA at a dose of at least 2 g/d is preferred to induce remission
(97,98). In a recent meta-analysis, a low dose of 2–2.4 g of 5-ASA
was found to be just as eﬀective as a higher dose (4.8 g/d) (RR,
0.91; 95% CI, 0.85–0.98) (97). A subgroup analysis indicated that
patients with more active (moderate) disease may beneﬁt from
the higher dose of 4.8 g/d (99). Once-daily dosing of oral 5-ASA
was demonstrated to be as eﬀective as multiple doses daily and
may facilitate compliance (99).
In patients with mildly active UC who fail to reach remission
with appropriately dosed 5-ASA, switching to an alternate 5-ASA
formulation is not recommended because meta-analyses have not
demonstrated a therapeutic diﬀerence between diﬀerent for-
mulations (100,101). However, no formal switch studies have been
published. In patients with UC who fail to respond to oral 5-ASA
therapy, oral corticosteroids can be used to induce remission. A
meta-analysis showed that corticosteroids are more eﬀective than
placebo in induction of remission (RR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.45–0.93)
(102). The typical starting doses of oral prednisone are 40–60 mg/d,
usually in a single dose, and clinical response is expected within 5–7
days of treatment. There were no observed diﬀerences, however,
when starting at doses higher than 60 mg/d (103). The duration of
systemic corticosteroids should be as short as possible with early
initiation of steroid-sparing therapy. The speed of the taper should
be guided by clinical symptoms, cumulative steroid exposure, and
onset of action of alternate therapies.
Budesonide is a locally acting corticosteroid with high ﬁrst-
pass metabolism and minimal systemic side eﬀects. In patients
with UC who fail to respond to 5-ASA, budesonide MMX 9 mg
for 8 weeks was found to be superior in achieving a combined end
point of clinical and endoscopic remission compared with con-
tinuing 5-ASA and placebo (P 5 0.049) (104). The use of corti-
costeroid preparations with high ﬁrst-pass metabolism and low
systemic eﬀects may be preferred over systemically active glu-
cocorticoids. Oral budesonide MMX is also safe and more ef-
fective than placebo in inducing remission in patients with mildly
active UC. In a prospective RCT, patients given 9 or 6 mg
budesonide MMX or 5-ASA achieved clinical remission 17.9%,
13.2%, and 12.1% of the time, respectively, compared with 7.4% in
the placebo group (P 5 0.0143, P 5 0.1393, and P 5 0.2200,
respectively) (98).
Adherence to medication is a factor in relapse in patients with
mildly active UC. A meta-analysis of 3 trials found no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in eﬃcacy or adherence between once-daily and
conventionally dosed 5-ASA for induction of remission in
patients with UC (nonremission RR, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.82–1.10)
(97,105). However, clinical trial populations are known to have
higher adherence rates than clinical practice settings. The prev-
alence of nonadherence in the community is high (40%), reaching
up to 68% in patients on more than 4 prescription medications
(106). An RCT found that patients with proctosigmoiditis pre-
ferred once-daily 5-ASA dosing over 3-times-daily dosing. Patients
also had a signiﬁcantly higher rate of clinical remission in the once-
daily dose group (86%; n 5 97) vs the t.i.d. group (73%; n 5 100;
P 5 0.0298) (107). Therefore, reinforcement of compliance is
an important aspect of management of UC, and any means to
optimize adherence should be used, including discussing once-
daily dosing options with patients, given these data on similar
eﬃcacy and safety.
In patients with mildly to moderately active UC, on appro-
priately dosed 5-ASA, probiotic VSL#3® at a daily dose of 3.6 3
1012 CFU/d has been studied as an adjunct to 5-ASA therapy to
improve symptoms compared with no treatment. In a meta-
analysis from 2017 including 22 studies of probiotics in the
treatment of IBD, there was no beneﬁt of probiotics in general for
induction of remission. However, when only studies of VSL#3®
were included (n 5 3), there did seem to be a beneﬁt (RR, 0.74;
95% CI, 0.63–0.87) in these small studies. All these studies were at
risk of bias, and the quality of the evidence was too low to make
a recommendation for or against the use of VSL#3® in UC (108).
In 1 clinical trial using VSL#3® as add-on therapy to 5-ASA,
endoscopic improvement was not achieved (109). A meta-anal-
ysis of 3 studies found that treatment with E. coli Nissle 1917
was comparable to 5-ASA therapy in patients with inactive UC
(RRpooled, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.86–1.37) (110). Similar methodological
concerns for these studies exist, including small sample size, risk
of bias, and high degree of heterogeneity, limiting the level of
evidence supporting this intervention. The control population
included placebo or 5-ASA. However, the comparison doses of
5-ASA were often #1,500 mg (less than a recommended main-
tenance dose). In 1 clinical trial, patients with UC randomized to
E. coli Nissle were less likely than those on placebo to reach
remission (111). Therefore, there is not suﬃcient evidence to
recommend for or against E. coli Nissle for induction of remission
of UC.
Similarly, FMT has showed some promising data in the
treatment of UC and has been studied in 3 RCTs (112–114).
These trials of FMT in UC have diﬀerent designs, delivery
mechanisms, donor types, and inclusion criteria. The RCTs for
FMT have had variable beneﬁts but not signiﬁcant steroid-spar-
ing eﬀects. The variability in fecal donors, delivery systems,
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
396
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
duration of treatment, and end points makes interpretation of
these results diﬃcult, and this is not currently a recommended
treatment option for UC (115).
Maintenance of remission in patients with previously mildly
active UC
Recommendations
16. In patients with mildly active ulcerative proctitis, we recommend rectal
5-ASA at a dose of 1 g/d for maintenance of remission (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
17. In patients with mildly active left-sided or extensive UC, we
recommend oral 5-ASA therapy (at least 2 g/d) for maintenance of
remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
18. We recommend against systemic corticosteroids for
maintenance of remission in patients with UC (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
A meta-analysis of 11 trials demon-
strated the eﬃcacy of oral 5-ASA agents (mesalamine, olsalazine,
and sulfasalazine) compared with placebo in patients with
quiescent UC (distal, left-sided, or extensive colitis) in
maintenance of remission (94). The overall RR of relapse was
0.65 (95% CI, 0.55–0.76). Fewer patients on the high-to-
standard dose of 5-ASA ($2 g/d) experienced relapse of their
quiescent disease compared with those on low dose (,2 g/d)
(RR of relapse, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64–0.97). The type of 5-ASA
agent was not found to predict rates of relapse in these patients
with controlled UC. In a recent Cochrane meta-analysis, oral
5-ASA compared with sulfasalazine was associated with
a higher rate of failure to maintain clinical or endoscopic re-
mission (RR, 1.14; 95% CI, 1.03–1.27) and a higher rate of
failure to maintain remission in general (RR, 1.08; 95% CI,
0.92–1.26). (101) However, sulfasalazine is often limited
by intolerance (headache and nausea), allergy to the sulfa
moiety, and need for multiple daily doses. A meta-analysis of
7 trials assessed the eﬃcacy of topical 5-ASA in preventing re-
lapse in controlled UC (116). Only 1 of the included placebo-
controlled trials assessed patients with extensive UC, whereas
the remaining trials recruited patients with proctitis, procto-
sigmoiditis, or left-sided colitis. Among the trials that reported
disease duration, the mean duration was 5–7 years. Compared
with patients receiving placebo, patients receiving topical
5-ASA had an RR of 0.60 (95% CI, 0.49–0.73) for relapse. Two
trials evaluated time to relapse in patients with rectal disease,
and both found that patients receiving topical 5-ASA experi-
enced relapse at a later time compared with those receiving
placebo. Corticosteroids are ineﬀective in maintaining remission
and are limited by their side eﬀects and possible complications.
Therefore, corticosteroids are not used for maintenance of re-
mission (117–120).
MANAGEMENT OF MODERATELY TO SEVERELY ACTIVE
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Induction of remission
Key concept statements
22. Strategies for the management of the nonhospitalized patient
withmoderately to severely active UC are similar with the exception
of a few considerations in which the data exist specifically for
a patient with moderately active UC:
a. 5-ASA therapy could be used as monotherapy for induction of
moderately but not severely active UC.
b. In patients with moderately active UC, consider nonsystemic
corticosteroids such as budesonide MMX before the use of
systemic therapy.
c. In patients with severely active UC, consider systemic
corticosteroids rather than topical corticosteroids.
23. Robust data on combination anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
immunomodulator therapy in moderately to severely active UC
exist only for infliximab and thiopurines.
24. Patients who are primary nonresponders to an anti-TNF (defined
as lack of therapeutic benefit after induction despite adequate
drug levels) should be evaluated and considered for alternative
mechanisms of disease control (e.g., in adifferent class of therapy)
rather than cycling to another drug within the anti-TNF class.
25. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who had an
initial response but subsequently lost efficacy to one anti-TNF
therapy, we recommend alternative anti-TNF therapy (but not
the biosimilar to the original brand) compared with no
treatment for induction of remission.
26. The patient with nonresponse or loss of response to therapy should
be assessed with therapeutic drug monitoring to identify the
reason for lack of response and whether to optimize the existing
therapy or to select an alternate therapy.
27. Obtain consultation with a surgeon and consider colectomy in
patients with moderately to severely active UC who are refractory
or intolerant to medical therapy.
Recommendations
19. In patients with moderately active UC, we recommend oral
budesonide MMX for induction of remission (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
20. In patients with moderately to severely active UC of any extent, we
recommend oral systemic corticosteroids to induce remission
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
21. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend
against monotherapy with thiopurines or methotrexate for
induction of remission (strong recommendation, low quality of
evidence).
22. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we
recommend anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab, golimumab,
or infliximab for induction of remission (strong
recommendation, high quality of evidence).
23. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have failed
5-ASA therapy and in whom anti-TNF therapy is used for induction
of remission, we suggest against using 5-ASA for added clinical
efficacy (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
24. When infliximab is used as induction therapy for patients with
moderately to severely active UC, we recommend combination
therapy with a thiopurine (strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence for azathioprine).
25. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend
vedolizumab for induction of remission (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
26. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have
previously failed anti-TNF therapy, we recommend vedolizumab for
induction of remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
27. In patients with moderately to severely active UC, we recommend
tofacitinib 10 mg orally b.i.d. for 8 weeks to induce remission
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
397
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
28. InpatientswithmoderatelytoseverelyactiveUCwhohavepreviously
failed anti-TNF therapy, we recommend tofacitinib for induction of
remission (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
29. Inpatients withmoderately toseverely active UC whoare responders
to anti-TNF therapy and now losing response, we suggest measuring
serum drug levels and antibodies (if there is not a therapeutic level) to
assess the reason for loss of response (conditional recommendation,
very low quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
Treatmentwith5-ASAtherapyhasbeen
shown to be eﬃcacious and safe as monotherapy for induction of
moderately but not severely active UC. One meta-analysis showed
that patients with moderately active disease beneﬁted from treat-
ment with 2.4 g/d, whereas corticosteroid therapy remained more
eﬀective for patients with severe disease (97).
Systemic corticosteroids are an acknowledged induction
strategy for moderately to severely active UC, with several small
controlled studies
demonstrating beneﬁt to this strategy
(98,102,121). In a meta-analysis of trials in patients with active
UC, the use of systemic glucocorticoids compared with placebo
demonstrated a beneﬁt favoring steroids (RR of failure to achieve
remission, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.45–0.93) (102,122). A colonic delivery
system of budesonide oﬀers more directed therapy and fewer
systemic side eﬀects, given the high ﬁrst-pass hepatic metabolism
of budesonide. In a dose-ﬁnding RCT in mildly to moderately
active UC, patients receiving oral 9 mg budesonide MMX were
more likely than patients receiving placebo to achieve induction
of combined clinical and endoscopic remission at week 8 (OR,
2.71; 95% CI, 1.19–6.16) (98). A multicenter phase 3 RCT showed
similar results, with signiﬁcantly more patients treated with
budesonide MMX 9 mg (but not 6 mg/d) achieving combined
clinical and endoscopic remission at week 8 compared with pla-
cebo (OR, 4.49; 95% CI, 1.47–13.72; P 5 0.0047) (121). Patients
receiving budesonide had a similar rate of adverse events com-
pared with patients receiving placebo (121).
Thiopurines are slow acting and do not induce remission in
moderately to severely active UC (122–124). Similarly, metho-
trexate is not an eﬀective induction agent in moderately to se-
verely active UC. Previous studies of oral methotrexate have not
demonstrated beneﬁt, and 2 recent meta-analyses of methotrex-
ate 25 mg intramuscularly are negative (123,125). In the recent
European multicenter study of methotrexate for induction of
remission of moderately to severely active UC, a higher pro-
portion of patients receiving parenteral methotrexate (25 mg/wk)
achieved steroid-free remission at week 16, but this result did not
achieve statistical signiﬁcance (126).
Inﬂiximab, adalimumab, and golimumab are eﬀective for the
induction of remission of moderately to severely active UC. All 3
anti-TNF agents have demonstrated superiority over placebo in
achieving the primary end points of response and remission, but
there have been no head-to-head trials comparing the agents to
one another (127–129). In the ULTRA 2 trial, 494 patients with
moderately to severely active UC were randomized to receive
adalimumab or placebo (130). The primary end point, induction
of remission at week 8, was reported based on anti-TNF exposure.
In patients who were previously exposed to anti-TNF agents,
patients receiving adalimumab were more likely than patients
receiving placebo to achieve remission at week 8 (9.2% vs 6.9%,
P 5 0.559) (130). Two meta-analyses compared the eﬃcacy of
inﬂiximab with the other anti-TNF agents using a network meta-
analysis
methodology
(128,129).
Although
some
of
the
comparisons did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, there was
a trend of higher remission rates in the patients with UC receiving
inﬂiximab compared with those receiving adalimumab or goli-
mumab. In patients with moderately to severely active UC who
were naive to anti-TNF agents and immunomodulators and who
had normal thiopurine methyltransferase activity, combination
therapy with inﬂiximab 5 mg/kg (loading 0, 2, and 6 weeks) and
azathioprine (2.5 mg/kg orally) was superior to monotherapy
with either agent alone in inducing corticosteroid-free clinical
remission at 16 weeks (131). Unlike a larger, similar study in CD
(132), monotherapy with inﬂiximab was not superior to mono-
therapy with azathioprine in this study of patients with UC.
Observational studies have compared the eﬃcacy of inﬂiximab
and adalimumab in biologic-naive patients with UC. In a Danish
study of 1,719 adults with UC, adalimumab was associated with
a higher rate of all-cause and UC-related hospitalizations but not
abdominal surgery (133). A second study suggested lower corti-
costeroid usage in inﬂiximab-treated patients with UC compared
with those using adalimumab (134). There are limited data on the
role of methotrexate in combination with an anti-TNF agent in
UC. Extrapolating data from patients with CD, it is possible that
methotrexate may oﬀer the same beneﬁt in terms of reducing
immunogenicity and improving drug concentrations when used
in combination with an anti-TNF agent and may be the preferred
immunomodulator for combination therapy in those at a higher
risk of adverse eﬀects of thiopurines such as young men or those
with multiple skin cancers.
The anti-integrin drug vedolizumab is an eﬀective therapy for
induction of remission of moderately to severely active UC. The
mechanism of this therapy (inhibition of alpha-4 beta-7 integ-
rins) targets the mucosal immune system of the gut, and there-
fore, the therapy has had a favorable safety proﬁle with a lower
risk of infections when compared with more systemic immuno-
suppression. In the GEMINI 1 induction trial, 374 patients were
randomized in a comparison cohort to receive vedolizumab or
placebo at weeks 0 and 2, whereas 521 patients were enrolled in
the open-label vedolizumab cohort (135). Approximately 40% of
these patients had failed or were intolerant to anti-TNF agents
before enrollment in this study. In the comparison cohort, 16.9%
and 40.9% of patients receiving vedolizumab achieved clinical
remission and mucosal healing at week 6, respectively, compared
with 5.4% and 24.8% of patients receiving placebo (P 5 0.001 for
both comparisons). Patients in the open-label cohort achieved
comparable remission rates as those receiving vedolizumab in the
comparison cohort. A post hoc analysis of the GEMINI 1 study
also demonstrated a greater eﬃcacy for vedolizumab compared
with placebo at inducing remission in patients who had pre-
viously failed treatment with anti-TNF agents (136). Three sub-
sequent systematic reviews demonstrated the superiority of
vedolizumab over placebo for induction of remission in UC
(128,137,138).
Tofacitinib is an orally administered small molecule that is
a nonselective inhibitor of the Janus kinase enzyme. Tofacitinib
was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the
treatment ofmoderate to severe UCin June 2018. The OCTAVE1
(n 5 598) and OCTAVE 2 (n 5 541) induction trials were con-
ducted to assess the eﬃcacy of tofacitinib 10 mg orally b.i.d.
compared with placebo (139). Patients enrolled had moderately
to severely active UC and had failed conventional therapies (half
of them had previously failed anti-TNF agents). The primary end
point was remission (total Mayo score of #2, no subscore of .1,
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
398
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
and rectal bleeding subscore of0) at 8weeks. In both trials, clinical
remission at week 8 occurred in a signiﬁcantly higher proportion
of patients treated with tofacitinib 10 mg b.i.d. (18.5% and 16.6%,
respectively) compared with those receiving placebo (8.2% and
3.6%, respectively). At 52 weeks, in the maintenance trial, 40.6%
of patients treated with tofacitinib 10 mg b.i.d. and 34.3% of
patients treated with 5 mg b.i.d. achieved remission compared
with 11.1% of those treated with placebo. Infectious complica-
tions were slightly more frequent with tofacitinib compared with
placebo in both the induction and maintenance trials. In partic-
ular, herpes zoster occurred in 5.1% of patients treated with
tofacitinib 10 mg b.i.d. compared with 0.5% of patients receiving
placebo (139).
Up to one-ﬁfth of patients receiving anti-TNF agents may
not respond initially, and an additional 10%–15% may lose
response every year despite an initial beneﬁt (140,141). There
are multiple factors that may contribute to primary non-
response or secondary loss of response, including concurrent
intestinal infection, overlapping functional bowel symptoms,
and, importantly, inadequate therapeutic drug concen-
trations. There are several reasons for low serum levels of
drug, including increased clearance due to increased in-
ﬂammatory burden, protein loss from a permeable inﬂamed
mucosa, the development of neutralizing antidrug antibodies,
or other patient-related factors such as increased body mass
index or male sex (142,143). Therefore, the approach to
a patient with inadequate primary response or secondary loss
of response should include careful clinical evaluation, con-
ﬁrmation of inﬂammation using objective measures (endos-
copy or surrogates such as CRP or FC), exclusion of enteric
infections, and assessment of serum drug concentration to
address the speciﬁc contributing factors and make a decision
regarding treatment options, pharmacokinetic manipulation,
or cycling/swapping therapies or mechanisms (144,145). In
patients who have nonresponse or loss of response to an anti-
TNF therapy, and in whom there is an adequate serum level of
anti-TNF, cycling within the class to another anti-TNF ther-
apy is not likely to be of beneﬁt. In these situations, swapping
to a diﬀerent mechanism of inﬂammatory control may be
preferred (144,145).
An emerging strategy in the treatment of UC is the use of
less systemic treatments before the use of systemic therapy.
However, the lack of head-to-head trials of this strategy limits
the strength of these considerations. Further data on com-
parative eﬃcacy with endoscopic and clinical outcomes could
dramatically inﬂuence our order of therapeutic agent selection
in UC. Nonetheless, the general principle of balancing eﬃcacy
and safety in choosing therapies could support an approach
of starting with organ-selective treatments before the use of
systemic therapies. Relevant examples could be the use of
topical rectal therapy before systemic therapy in distal colitis
or the use of budesonide formulations before the use of sys-
temic corticosteroids. Similarly, in some patient populations,
it is reasonable to consider the use of the gut-selective anti-
integrin therapy vedolizumab before the use of systemically
acting anti-TNF therapies or small molecules such as Janus
kinase inhibitors. For patients who have pronounced extra-
intestinal manifestations such as skin or joint problems, more
systemic or combination approaches may be preferred. There
are some reasonable considerations for preferential use of
organ-selective therapy, such as the older patient in whom
there may be concern for a higher risk of opportunistic
infections with systemic therapy or the patient with the par-
adoxical UC in the setting of organ transplantation and con-
comitant immune suppression (146,147).
Maintenance of remission in patients with previously moderately
to severely active UC
Key concept statements
28. 5-ASA therapy for maintenance of remission is likely not as
effective in previously severely active UC compared with
previously moderately active UC.
29. Budesonide MMX has not been studied for maintenance of
remission of previously moderately to severely active UC.
30. Most clinical trials and available data demonstrate a benefit of
using the steroid-sparing therapy that induces remission to
maintain that remission.
31. There is insufficient evidence supporting a benefit for proactive
therapeutic drug monitoring in all unselected patients with UC in
remission.
32. We suggest elective proctocolectomy in patients with UC failing
maximal medical management.
Recommendations
30. In patients with previously moderately to severely active UC who
have achieved remission but previously failed 5-ASA therapy and
are now on anti-TNF therapy, we recommend against using
concomitant 5-ASA for efficacy of maintenance of remission
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
31. We recommend against systemic corticosteroids for maintenance
of remission in patients with UC (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
32. For patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now
in remission due to corticosteroid induction, we suggest
thiopurines for maintenance of remission compared with no
treatment or corticosteroids (conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
33. In patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in
remission, we recommend against using methotrexate for
maintenance of remission (conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
34. We recommend continuing anti-TNF therapy using adalimumab,
golimumab, or infliximab for maintenance of remission after anti-
TNF induction in patients with previously moderately to severely
active UC (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
35. We recommend continuing vedolizumab to maintain remission in
patients with previously moderately to severely active UC now in
remission after vedolizumab induction (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
36. We recommend continuing tofacitinib for maintenance of
remission in patients with previously moderately to severely active
UC now in remission after induction with tofacitinib (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
Although corticosteroids are eﬃca-
cious in inducing remission in patients with active UC, they
should not be used for maintenance of remission and should be
tapered instead (118–120). Although the optimal tapering regi-
men has not been determined, the dose is usually reduced over
8–12 weeks (117). In 2 RCTs, thiopurines have not been shown to
provide signiﬁcant maintenance beneﬁt in patients with UC who
have had induction of remission with corticosteroids (RR, 0.85;
95% CI, 0.71–1.01) (123). In an additional 3 RCTs, azathioprine
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
399
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
prevented relapse in 127 patients (RR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.37–0.95)
(123). Another systematic review encompassing 1,632 patients
with UC in 30 studies showed that azathioprine and mercapto-
purine had a 76% mean eﬃcacy in maintenance of remission.
Compared with placebo, treatment with thiopurines resulted in an
absolute risk reduction of 23% and a number needed to treat of 5 to
prevent recurrence (OR, 2.59; 95% CI, 1.26–5.3) (148). Thiopurine
therapy also provided clinical beneﬁt when treating patients who
had failed or could not tolerate mesalamine or sulfasalazine (149).
However, in a prospective RCT, methotrexate was not found to be
superior for maintenance of remission when compared with pla-
cebo (150). The US-based Methotrexate Response in Treatment of
Ulcerative Colitis (MERIT-UC) trial demonstrated that parenteral
methotrexate (25 mg/wk) was not superior to placebo in main-
taining remission after steroid induction (151). In this study, 29/44
(66%) patients receiving methotrexate experienced relapse com-
pared with 25/40 (63%) patients receiving placebo (151).
In patients with moderately to severely active UC who have
responded to anti-TNF therapy during induction dosing, anti-
TNF agents are superior to placebo in maintaining remission
(127). A systemic meta-analysis including 6 placebo-controlled,
double-blind studies demonstrated that adalimumab, golimu-
mab, and inﬂiximab were all more eﬃcacious than placebo in
maintaining clinical remission in patients with UC (128). A meta-
analysis, however, showed no diﬀerence in the superiority of
a single agent over the other anti-TNF agents (129). Similarly,
vedolizumab was eﬀective in maintaining remission in patients
with UC compared with no treatment (128,146). One systematic
review and meta-analysis encompassing 4 studies with a total of
606 patients indicated that vedolizumab was superior to placebo
in the maintenance of remission, with no statistical diﬀerence in
adverse events or serious adverse events between the groups
(137,138). In a pivotal trial of vedolizumab as maintenance
therapy, patients responding to induction were randomized at
week 6 to maintenance therapy with vedolizumab (300 mg i.v.
every 8 weeks) or to placebo. A total of 40% of patients receiving
vedolizumab maintained remission at week 52 compared with
16% of patients who received placebo (135). A post hoc analysis
demonstrated that patients who were anti-TNF naive were more
likely than those who had received anti-TNF therapy previously
to respond to vedolizumab (136).
Tofacitinib also has eﬃcacy in maintenance of moderately to
severely active UC. The maintenance trial of tofacitinib compared
remission rates of tofacitinib (5 or 10 mg) b.i.d. with placebo at
week 52, with remission rates of 34.3% in the 5-mg group, 40.6%
in the 10-mg group, and 11% in the placebo group (P , 0.001 for
both 5- and 10-mg arms compared with placebo) (139). In sub-
group analyses, patients with previous anti-TNF failure seemed to
beneﬁt from the higher maintenance dose (152). The rates of
serious adverse events were comparable across the 3 groups, with
the exception of a higher rate of herpes zoster infection in the
tofacitinib group (139).
MANAGEMENT OF THE HOSPITALIZED PATIENT WITH
ACUTE SEVERE ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Key concept statements
33. All patients admitted with acute severe ulcerative colitis (ASUC)
should have stool testing to rule out CDI.
34. All patients with ASUC should undergo a flexible sigmoidoscopy
within 72 hours, and preferably within 24 hours of admission. This
should be used to assess endoscopic severity of inflammation and
to obtain biopsies to evaluate for cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis.
35. All patients with ASUC should be assessed for the presence of toxic
megacolon on a regular basis during the hospital admission.
36. Response in patients with ASUC should be monitored using stool
frequency, rectal bleeding, physical examination, vital signs, and
serial CRP measurements.
37.NSAIDs, opioids, and medications with anticholinergic side effects
should be avoided in ASUC.
38. In patients failing to adequately respond to medical therapy by 3–5
days or with suspected toxicity, surgical consultation should be
obtained.
39. The choice between infliximab and cyclosporine should be
based on provider experience with the agent, history of previous
failure of immunomodulator or anti-TNF therapy, and serum
albumin.
40. Toxic megacolon, colonic perforation, severe refractory
hemorrhage, and refractoriness to medical therapy are indications
for surgery in patients with ASUC.
41. Infliximab and cyclosporine do not increase postoperative
complications of colectomy, and surgery should not be deferred
based on this exposure.
Recommendations
37. In patients with ASUC, we recommend DVT prophylaxis to prevent
venous thromboembolism (VTE) (strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
38. In patients with ASUC, we recommend testing for CDI (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
39. In patients with ASUC and concomitant CDI, we recommend
treatment of CDI with vancomycin instead of metronidazole
(strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
40. We recommend against the routine use of broad-spectrum
antibiotics in the management of ASUC (strong recommendation,
low quality of evidence).
41. We suggest against total parenteral nutrition for the purpose of
bowel rest in ASUC (conditional recommendation, very low quality
of evidence).
42. In patients with ASUC, we recommend methylprednisolone
60 mg/d or hydrocortisone 100 mg 3 or 4 times per day to induce
remission (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
43. In patients with ASUC failing to adequately respond to intravenous
corticosteroids (IVCS) by 3–5 days, we recommend medical
rescue therapy with infliximab or cyclosporine (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
44. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with infliximab
treatment, we recommend maintenance of remission with the
same agent (strong recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
45. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine
treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission with thiopurines
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
46. In patients with ASUC who achieve remission with cyclosporine
treatment, we suggest maintenance of remission with vedolizumab
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
Acute severe ulcerative colitis (ASUC)
is deﬁned as the presence of 6 or more bowel movements daily
accompanied by at least 1 systemic sign of toxicity including
tachycardia, fever, anemia (hemoglobin , 10.5 g/dL), or elevated
inﬂammatory markers (ESR . 30 mm/hr) (44). In children,
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
400
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
a PUCAI $ 65 is used to deﬁne ASUC (54). Patients with ASUC
should be admitted to the hospital for inpatient management,
IVCS therapy initiation in addition to supportive care with ﬂuids
and electrolytes. Up to one-quarter of patients with UC may
develop ASUC requiring hospitalization (153,154), resulting in
colectomy in 40% of patients (154). Even if the index hospitali-
zation does not result in colectomy, patients requiring hospital-
ization represent a subgroup at a high risk of subsequent adverse
outcomes including need for colectomy (155). Thresholds for
hospitalization vary across institutions, and patients with UC
who do not meet these criteria may require hospitalization for
inpatient management. In addition, although most patients with
severe colitis should be admitted to the hospital, in select cases,
outpatient management with close follow-up may be appropriate.
We recommend initial C. diﬀtesting in patients with ASUC. In
a retrospective observational study at a tertiary referral center, it
was found that in 2004–2005, more than half of the C. diﬀ–
infected patients with IBD required hospitalization, and 20%
required colectomy (156). Various tests are available for the di-
agnosis of CDI in this setting, the most common ones being
ELISA against C. diﬀtoxins A 1 B and nucleic acid ampliﬁcation
tests such as PCR (22). The latter tests are more sensitive, but
emerging evidence suggests that they may result in false-positive
results, particularly in patients without documented diarrhea
(22). Repeat stool testing is frequently not required but has been
demonstrated to improve yield in some settings and should be
performed on a case-by-case basis (156). In 1 series, up to 47% of
hospitalizations for UC were associated with CDI (157). Al-
though other cohorts have reported a lower frequency, patients
with UC and CDI have a 4-fold increase in mortality, longer
hospital stays, and higher rate of colectomy, emergency de-
partment visits, therapy escalation, and hospitalizations up to 1
year after the index episode (18,157–159). Patients with IBD who
develop CDI also frequently lack the traditional risk factors as-
sociated with C. diﬀ, such as previous hospitalization or antibiotic
use (160). Consequently, a high index of suspicion must be
maintained. More extensive disease, more severe disease, and
immunosuppression (in particular corticosteroid use) may be
associated with a higher risk of CDI (156,160,161). Although
controlled trial data are limited, emerging evidence suggests
a higher failure rate with metronidazole, suggesting that oral
vancomycin should be the ﬁrst-line agent for treatment of CDI in
the hospitalized patient with ASUC (22,162).
There are several goals of endoscopic evaluation in patients
with ASUC, namely, to establish the severity of inﬂammation, to
conﬁrm the diagnosis (in the setting of diagnostic uncertainty),
and to obtain biopsies to diagnose CMV colitis. As a complete
colonoscopy in patients with severe inﬂammation may be asso-
ciated with higher rates of colonic dilation and perforation,
a carefully performed ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy with minimal in-
suﬄation by an experienced operator is suﬃcient for most
patients. Although there are no standardized endoscopic activity
scores speciﬁc to ASUC, endoscopic ﬁndings of deep ulcerations
correlate with failure of corticosteroid therapy and need for res-
cue therapy or colectomy. In a cohort of 89 patients hospitalized
with ASUC, the UCEIS was higher in patients requiring rescue
therapy or colectomy (median 6) than in those who did not
(median 5, P , 0.005). A UCEIS score of 5 or greater was asso-
ciated with a 50% likelihood of rescue therapy and 33% rate of
colectomy compared with 27% and 9%, respectively, in those with
a score of #4 (163). In a prospective French study of 85
consecutive patients with ASUC, the presence of extensive deep
colonic ulcerations was associated with nonresponse to cortico-
steroid therapy and need for colectomy (80). A recent retro-
spective review of 92 patients with ASUC showed that the UCEIS
score correlated with both the Mayo endoscopic score (Spear-
man’s rho, 0.762; P , 0.001) and the need for colectomy (ad-
justed OR, 3.25; 95% CI, 1.77–5.97; P , 0.001) (164). A UCEIS
score of $7 had a higher positive predictive value of need for
colectomy when compared with a Mayo endoscopic score of 3
(receiver-operator characteristic area 0.85 vs 0.65, respectively).
CMV colitis may aﬀect up to one-third of patients with ASUC
refractory to corticosteroid therapy (165,166). Risk factors for
CMV include medically refractory disease, treatment with cor-
ticosteroids (less consistently immunomodulators and biologics),
and presence of endoscopic ulceration (167). Endoscopically,
CMV has a predisposition for actively inﬂamed tissues; biopsies
from the base of the ulcer have the greatest yield. Histologic ev-
idence of viral cytopathic eﬀect on hematoxylin-eosin has poor
sensitivity in identifying CMV disease (168). Immunohisto-
chemistry staining, rapid viral culture methods, and PCR-based
assays are the preferred modalities to diagnose CMV disease
(165,166). Although there is debate about whether CMV colitis
represents a true pathogenic eﬀect or a “bystander eﬀect,” evi-
dence suggests a higher rate of treatment refractoriness and need
for colectomy in patients with demonstrable CMV colitis. Con-
sequently, identiﬁcation of this disease should prompt treatment
with antiviral therapy in the setting of refractoriness to steroids or
biologic therapy. In patients who are responding to standard
treatment of UC such as intravenous steroids, studies have not
demonstrated that there is an added beneﬁt to antiviral treatment.
When treating CMV colitis, the most commonly studied agent is
ganciclovir,
administered
initially
intravenously
and
sub-
sequently orally for a 14-day course (165,166), with a response
rate around 70%. Oral therapy with valganciclovir may also be
appropriate in selected patients. Given the uncertainty about the
pathogenic role of CMV in this setting, colectomy should not be
deferred until the completion of the full course of treatment in
nonresponders.
Features suggestive of severe colitis on plain abdominal ﬁlms
include a thickened colonic wall, loss of haustrations, and mu-
cosal islands (edematous mucosasurrounded by ulcerations). In 1
study, the presence of 3 or more dilated, gas-ﬁlled small bowel
loops indicated a high likelihood of nonresponse to medical
therapy and need for colectomy (169). In addition, plain ab-
dominal radiographs may be useful in identifying colonic dilation
(transverse colon diameter . 5.5 cm), which predicts a worse
outcome. Abdominal imaging should be in conjunction with
a careful physical examination eliciting abdominal tenderness,
rebound, guarding, tympany, and ileus. Cross-sectional imaging
with CT should be restricted to patients with a suspected extra-
luminal complication, perforation, and in those newly diagnosed
where the distinction between CD and UC may not be apparent
on sigmoidoscopy.
Close monitoring of patients with ASUC is essential to identify
early nonresponders to IVCS therapy whomayrequire medical or
surgical rescue therapy. Day-to-day monitoring should include
assessment of vital signs, physical examination to evaluate for
abdominal distension or tenderness, and assessment of frequency
of bowel movements, presence of visible blood, abdominal pain,
and systemic symptoms. Several indexes have been proposed to
identify nonresponders to therapy. The most widely recognized is
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
401
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
the Oxford index where more than 8 bowel movements on day 3
of IVCS treatment or 3–8 bowel movements along with a CRP
.45 mg/L predicted colectomy in 85% of patients meeting the
above criteria (32). By contrast, the rate of colectomy in those with
partial and complete response was 40% and 5%, respectively. In
children, a PUCAI score of greater than 45 at day 3 or greater than
70 at day 5 predicted failure of IVCS therapy and need for salvage
(170). Other parameters predicting failure of steroid therapy in-
clude hypoalbuminemia and colonic dilation (integrated into the
Ho index in conjunction with number of bowel movements)
(171), elevation in ESR . 75 mm/hr, and body temperature
.38 °C (172).
NSAIDs have been associated with IBD-related hospital-
izations and disease relapses in up to one-third of patients (15).
Consequently, they should be avoided in ASUC. Opioids and
agents with anticholinergic side eﬀects may precipitate colonic
dilation and toxicity and have been associated with poor out-
comes including risk of infections and mortality and should be
avoided. With the above restrictions, management of pain in
patients with ASUC is challenging and should be multimodal,
relying on pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic measures. A
combination approach with nonpharmacologic measures (such
as heating pads), acetaminophen, in conjunction with anxiolytics
and sedatives may be helpful to allay pain in a signiﬁcant pro-
portion of patients. Suspicion for paradoxical hypersensitivity to
aminosalicylate therapy should be entertained in patients who
have recently initiated therapy with oral or topical 5-ASA agents,
and such medications should be stopped at hospitalization.
All patients hospitalized with ASUC should be closely fol-
lowed by a multidisciplinary team. Surgical consultation should
be obtained for patients who are failing IVCS and are initiating
rescue therapy. In addition to medically refractory disease, urgent
surgery is indicated for patients who develop toxic megacolon
(fewer than 5% of patients with ASUC), perforation, or massive
hemorrhage. Delayed surgery in ASUC is associated with poor
outcomes and must be avoided. The preferred surgical treatment
of choice is a subtotal or a total colectomy with end ileostomy.
Medical rescue therapy with inﬂiximab or cyclosporine has not
been shown to increase rates of postoperative complications, and
necessary surgery should not be deferred based on this expo-
sure (173).
Inﬂammatory bowel disease is associated with an increased
risk of VTE (174–178). This risk is particularly apparent in
hospitalized patients and is proportional to severity of in-
ﬂammation (177). Other factors contributing to VTE risk in these
patients include loss of antithrombotic proteins, use of cortico-
steroids, reduced mobility, and abdominal surgery (176,179). As
many patients with IBD who develop VTE do not seem to have an
underlying genetic predisposition or other risk factors (178),
thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin should
be given to all hospitalized patients with acute colitis. Sub-
cutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin seems to be safe even in
patients with active bleeding from their UC and is not associated
with worsening hemorrhage (180). Administration of pharma-
cologic prophylaxis may additionally be associated with reduced
rates of VTE after hospitalization, although this beneﬁt has not
been robustly demonstrated (181,182).
Four clinical trials have examined the role of adjuvant anti-
biotics in hospitalized patients with ASUC. The antibiotics
studied included metronidazole (183), tobramycin (184), cipro-
ﬂoxacin (185), and vancomycin (186). In each of the studies, there
was no diﬀerence in the proportion of patients responding to
medical therapy or needing surgery. In addition, given the known
associationbetween antibiotics andrisk ofCDI in thispopulation,
the use of antibiotics should be restricted to those with suspected
extraluminal complications or systemic signs of toxicity.
The role of complete bowel rest and parenteral nutrition has
been examined in RCTs where there was no beneﬁt over placebo
(187,188). In a trial comprising 36 patients, 6/17 patients in
the control group and 9/19 patients with total bowel rest and
TPN required surgery for treatment of their colitis (P 5 not
signiﬁcant) (188).
Systemic IVCS are the main stay of treatment of ASUC. Their
eﬃcacy was ﬁrst established in an open-label series, in which 49
patients hospitalized with severe colitis were administered
prednisolone 60 mg/d in divided doses along with topical hy-
drocortisone enemas. At 5 days, 73% of patients were in re-
mission, and only 18% reported no improvement or worsening of
symptoms. On long-term follow-up, 47% of patients achieving
remission were able to maintain their clinical status, and only 18%
required subsequent surgery (189). In a systematic review of 32
studies that included 1,948 adults receiving IVCS therapy, the
mean response rate was 67% (103). Just under one-third of
patients (27%) underwent colectomy during the index hospital-
ization. Meta-regression revealed no beneﬁt to a dose higher than
60 mg of methylprednisolone. IVCS can be administered as
a single dose, divided doses, or a continuous drip with no dif-
ference in eﬃcacy (190). Topical corticosteroid therapy may
additionally help patients with symptoms of distal involvement.
Response to IVCS is usually apparent within 3–5 days of initia-
tion, and additional response after 7 days is unlikely. Thus, pro-
longed IVCS therapy beyond this duration without initiation of
rescue therapy cannot be recommended. In the setting of sus-
pected CDI or CMV infection, it may be necessary to continue
IVCS therapy, as the eﬀect of infection may not be separable from
that of the underlying colitis. The eﬃcacy of cyclosporine in acute
steroid-refractory colitis was ﬁrst established in a landmark
controlled trial. Twenty patients with severely active UC without
response to 7 days of IVCS therapy were randomized to receive
cyclosporine 4 mg/kg or placebo (191). Nine of 11 patients who
were administered cyclosporine demonstrated a clinical response
at a mean of 7 days compared with none of the patients who
received placebo. Similar short-term eﬃcacy has been demon-
strated at other centers (192,193). However, on long-term follow-
up, up to 80% of patients may eventually require colectomy
(193,194). Patients who are thiopurine naive at the time of ini-
tiation of cyclosporine and receive thiopurine maintenance
therapy have a lower risk of colectomy than patients who were
either not initiated on thiopurines or had previously failed this
therapy (194–196). One study demonstrated comparable clinical
response and colectomy rates with 2 mg/kg of cyclosporine
compared with 4 mg/kg, suggesting that the lower dose should be
preferred, given similar response and lower frequency of adverse
events (197). Therefore, 2 mg/kg is the targeted cyclosporine dose
for treatment of ASUC, with additional studies describing drug
levels in the range of 200–400 for eﬃcacy (198,199). Although
cyclosporine has similar eﬃcacy to IVCS (200), its use should be
restricted to those failing IVCS therapy except in patients who
have contraindications or intolerance to corticosteroids.
The eﬃcacy of inﬂiximab in the treatment of patients with
ASUC has been demonstrated in small clinical trials and several
observational case series. In 1 pilot study, 4 of 8 patients who
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
402
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
received inﬂiximab had clinical response by 2 weeks compared
with none of the patients who were administered placebo (201).
Inﬂiximab was also associated with biochemical response with
improvement in circulating inﬂammatory markers. In a pivotal
RCT, 45 patients not responding to 4 days of corticosteroid
therapy were randomized to a single infusion of inﬂiximab 5 mg/
kg or placebo. Among 24 patients who received inﬂiximab, only 7
patients required a colectomy by 3 months compared with 14/21
patients receiving placebo (P 5 0.017) (202). Long-term follow-
up of this trial revealed continued beneﬁt at 3 years (203). Pro-
spective observational series conﬁrmed the short-term eﬃcacy of
inﬂiximab therapy in ASUC (204,205). In a long-term follow-up
study of 211 patients from Sweden, the colectomy-free survival
rates after inﬂiximab rescue therapy at 3, 12, 36, and 60 months
were 71%, 64%, 59%, and 53%, respectively, with over half the
patients achieving steroid-free remission by 12 months (206).
There is growing interest in the optimization of inﬂiximab dosing
in ASUC, recognizing that fecal drug loss may result in sub-
therapeutic serum and tissue concentrations, resulting in a sub-
optimal response rate (207). A retrospective study of 50 patients
receiving accelerated inﬂiximab induction, deﬁned as 3 induction
doses within a median period of 24 days, demonstrated a lower
rate of colectomy with the accelerated regimen (7%) compared
with standard dosing (40%); however, the rates of colectomy at 3
months were similar between the 2 groups, suggesting that the
short-term beneﬁt may not translate into improved long-term
outcomes (208). Thus, although accelerated or high-dose in-
duction regimens may be appropriate for a subgroup of patients
with severe UC, their routine use cannot be recommended with
the existing evidence. There are no data on the use of adalimu-
mab, golimumab, vedolizumab, or tofactinib as rescue therapy in
ASUC, and their use cannot currently be recommended in this
setting. Routine use of medical salvage therapy in patients failing
inﬂiximab or cyclosporine therapy cannot be recommended and
may be associated with a signiﬁcant risk of adverse outcomes.
Tacrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor that has been examined
in the treatment of steroid-refractory UC both in children and
adults. In a double-blind placebo-controlled trial of 62 patients,
the clinical response rate at week 2 was 50% with tacrolimus
compared with 13% with placebo (P 5 0.003) (209). Rates of
mucosal healing were also superior with tacrolimus compared
with placebo (44% vs 13%), and side eﬀects were few. The optimal
target serum trough levels for tacrolimus seem to be 10–15 ng/mL
(210), and eﬃcacy seems to be similar in children (211). However,
there are limited data on long-term outcomes and colectomy
rates (211).
In a RCT comparing cyclosporine with inﬂiximab in patients
with acute severe UC not responding to IVCS (Study Comparing
Cyclosporine With Inﬂiximab in Steroid-Refractory Severe
Attacks of Ulcerative Colitis), 115 patients across 27 institutions
were randomized to receive cyclosporine (2 mg/kg for 1 week,
followed by oral cyclosporine) or inﬂiximab (5 mg/kg at weeks 0,
2, and 6) (212). Responders in both groups received treatment
with azathioprine from day 7 and were followed through 98 days.
At the end of the follow-up, treatment failure deﬁned as absence
of day 7 clinical response, relapse between day 7 and day 98, or
absence of steroid-free remission at day 98 was similar with cy-
closporine (60%) and inﬂiximab (54%).The median change in the
Lichtiger score was greater at days 3 and 4 with inﬂiximab
compared with cyclosporine, but the median time to response was
similar between both groups (5 days with cyclosporine and 4 days
with inﬂiximab) (213). There was no diﬀerence in the rates of
mucosal healing or need for colectomy. In long-term follow-up
from this trial, there was no diﬀerence in colectomy-free survival
based on treatment arm. Inﬂiximab patients were maintained
with inﬂiximab, and the cyclosporine patients had various
maintenance strategies that did not include cyclosporine.
Colectomy-free survival rates after 1 and 5 years of follow-up
were, respectively, 70.9% (95% CI, 59.2%–82.6%) and 61.5% (95%
CI, 48.7%–74.2%) in patients who received cyclosporine and
69.1% (95% CI, 56.9%–81.3%) and 65.1% (95% CI, 52.4%–77.8%)
in those who received inﬂiximab (P 5 0.97) (214). A second
clinical trial, COmparison of iNﬂiximab and cyclosporine in
STeroid Resistant Ulcerative ColiTis (CONSTRUCT), addition-
ally compared diﬀerences in QoL and health care costs between
the 2 treatments. There were no diﬀerences between the 2 groups
(each group consisting of 135 patients allocated to either treat-
ment) in terms of quality-adjusted survival, frequency of colec-
tomy, time to colectomy, or adverse events (including mortality)
(215). Another multicenter study, using data from the ENEIDA
registry, with a total of 740 patients treated with cyclosporine,
inﬂiximab, or sequential rescue therapy showed a similar eﬃcacy
between the 2 treatments, including similar colectomy and
mortality rates, but highlighted a lower rate of adverse eﬀects in
the cyclosporine group (216).
The choice between cyclosporine and inﬂiximab should be
made based on provider experience with each drug. Inﬂiximab is
commonly used in the outpatient management of both CD and
UC, and consequently, there is greater provider familiarity with
dosing and monitoring for adverse events. By contrast, as cyclo-
sporine is used less frequently and only at select centers, its use in
steroid-refractory colitis should be restricted to providers who are
familiar with dosing, monitoring trough concentrations, and
managing adverse eﬀects. As the rates of treatment failure and
colectomy are signiﬁcantly higher in patients receiving cyclo-
sporine who have previously failed immunomodulator therapy,
inﬂiximab may be a preferred agent in such patients. Post hoc
stratiﬁed analysis of the Study Comparing Cyclosporine With
Inﬂiximab in Steroid-Refractory Severe Attacks of Ulcerative
Colitis trial additionally revealed treatment eﬀects favoring
inﬂiximab in patients with albumin ,23 g/L (212). In addition,
patients with lower serum cholesterol or magnesium are at
a greater risk of neurological adverse events from cyclosporine
therapy and should be considered for treatment with inﬂiximab.
There is considerable interest in the use of cyclosporine or
inﬂiximab as salvage therapy after failure of either agent. How-
ever, data supporting long-term eﬃcacy are scarce. In a retro-
spective review of patients who either received inﬂiximab after
failing cyclosporine (n 5 10) or cyclosporine after failing inﬂix-
imab (n 5 9), the rates of remission ranged from 30% to 40% in
both groups. However, severe adverse outcomes were noted in
16%, including 1 death from sepsis and 1 case each of herpetic
esophagitis and acute pancreatitis with bacteremia. Other ob-
servational series similarly suggest that 60% of patients require
colectomy by 12 months with either cyclosporine or inﬂiximab
salvage (217,218). However, the rate of severe adverse outcomes,
including infectious complications, seems to be high. This sug-
gests that the select patients who are receiving salvage therapy
should be closely monitored for such outcomes.
Patients with ASUC who have previously failed inﬂiximab or
other anti-TNF biologic therapy are a growing subgroup. Pre-
viously, if such patients had also failed immunomodulator
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
403
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
therapy,theywerenotconsideredcandidatesforcalcineurintherapy
induction in the absence of an eﬀective maintenance agent. Several
recent reports suggest that vedolizumab may serve as a maintenance
therapy for such patients when combined with a calcineurin agent
(cyclosporine or tacrolimus) for a more rapid induction of re-
mission. Eleven patients with UC received combination therapy
with a calcineurin inhibitor and vedolizumab as a bridge to vedo-
lizumab monotherapy, of which 55% of these achieved steroid-free
clinical remission by week 14. At 1 year, 45% of these patients with
UC were in steroid-free clinical remission. Two patients received
salvage therapy with a calcineurin inhibitor after primary non-
response to vedolizumab; 1 patient was oﬀthe calcineurin inhibitor
and achieved steroid-free remission at week 52 (199).
Indications for colectomy in UC include (i) ASUC or (ii)
chronic refractory UC not responding to traditional medical
therapy or (iii) development of dysplasia and/or carcinoma in
chronic UC. We focus on the ﬁrst 2 indications for the purpose of
this guideline. The absolute indications for surgery in ASUC in-
clude toxic megacolon, perforation, uncontrolled severe hema-
tochezia,andmultiorgandysfunction(219).Colectomyshouldalso
be considered in any patient who fails to progress after 3–5 days of
corticosteroids. Delays in surgery can be associated with an in-
creased risk of postoperative complications (220). Delayed surgery
for ASUC is associated with an increased risk of postoperative
complications (221). The deﬁnition of chronic refractory UC can
include either (i) individuals who are refractory to induction of
remission with biologics, corticosteroids, or small molecule thera-
pies or (ii) individuals who are corticosteroid dependent. Patients
who meet these criteria should be considered for surgery and of-
fered early referral and consultation with a surgeon.
A recent systematic review demonstrated that early compli-
cations of colectomy (#30 days postoperatively) occurred in
9%–65% of patients with UC, whereas late complications (.30
days postoperatively) occurred in 17%–55% of patients. Overall
postoperative mortality associated with colectomy for UC was 1%
(222). Of the various therapies for UC, prolonged corticosteroids
in particular are associated with an increased risk of postoperative
infectious complications in observational studies after surgery
(223). In a meta-analysis of observational studies of anti-TNF use
before surgery in IBD, the pooled prevalence of any postoperative
complication in UC was 35%. Preoperative anti-TNF was asso-
ciated with an increased risk of postoperative infectious compli-
cations in CD but not in UC (224). In a single-center retrospective
cohort, a detectable level of anti-TNF (compared with no level)
was not associated with increased surgical complications in
patients with UC (225). A retrospective series describing peri-
operative use of vedolizumab and postoperative infectious com-
plications
in
patients
with
UC
undergoing
colectomy
demonstrated no increased risk, although overall numbers were
small (226). There are no current data on small molecules and
subsequent colectomy in patients with UC.
Another factor heavily inﬂuencing surgical outcomes is nutri-
tional status/malnourishment. Optimization of nutritional status
should be considered in the period before colectomy if possible.
Poor nutritional status is associated with increased in-hospital
mortality,increased lengthof stay and costs, and increased infection
rates.
Deﬁnitions
of
malnourishment
include
weight
loss
.10%–15% in the previous 6 months, body mass index ,18.5 kg/
m2, and serum albumin ,30 g/L (227,228). Enteral and/or paren-
teral options should be considered in malnourished patients with
UC based on individual clinical scenarios.
Restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anasto-
mosis (IPAA) is currently the surgical procedure of choice for the
management of refractory UC. Construction of the pouch is not
performed in the ﬁrst stage of the procedure for the refractory
patient on medical therapies such as corticosteroids. This staged
approach minimizes complications and initial operation time.
Delaying the reconstruction allows for improvement in nutri-
tional status and the ability to minimize the potential for
infectious complications of UC therapies. Therefore, a multiple-
staged approach should be considered in patients with UC un-
dergoing colectomy for ASUC or chronic refractory UC not
responding to medical therapy.
COLORECTAL CANCER PREVENTION IN
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Key concept statements
42. Screening and subsequent surveillance colonoscopy to assess for
dysplasia in individuals with UC of extent greater than the rectum
should start 8 years after diagnosis.
43. Patients with UC and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) should
undergo a screening colonoscopy at the time of diagnosis of UC
and surveillance annually thereafter.
44. Surveillance colonoscopies in patients with UC should be
performed at 1- to 3-year intervals based on the combined
risk factors for colorectal cancer (CRC) in UC and the
findings on previous colonoscopy. Specific interval should be
based on combined risk factors and findings from previous
examinations.
45. During colonoscopic examination in patients with UC, the
endoscopist should identify raised lesions and abnormal pit
patterns and perform targeted biopsies. Endoscopically discrete
lesions should be removed, clearly labeling and separating distinct
lesions and segments of the colorectum.
46. Most neoplasia in UC is visible with standard- or high-definition
white-light examinations.
47. It is unclear whether segmental random biopsies are still required
during surveillance colonoscopy in UC.
48. Pathologic interpretation of UC-associated neoplasia should be
performed by a pathologist experienced in gastrointestinal
pathology, and neoplastic findings should be reviewed bya second
experienced pathologist.
49. When dysplasia in UC of any grade is discrete and has been
completely removed, proctocolectomy may not be necessary. If
surgery is not performed, subsequent surveillance colonoscopy
should initially be performed at shortened intervals.
50. When dysplasia in UC is not resectable or is multifocal, the patient
should be referred for proctocolectomy.
51. Patients with UC who have extensive inflammatory polyps may
not be able to have adequate surveillance and should be
informed about this fact and that more frequent surveillance or
surgery may be required.
52. No medical therapy has demonstrated sufficient prevention of
dysplasia or CRC to avoid colonoscopic surveillance in UC.
53. Patients with UC-associated dysplasia who are undergoing
ongoing active surveillance may benefit from the use of
augmented visualization by dye spray chromoendoscopy in their
first examination after UC-associated dysplasia was detected.
54. Fecal DNA testing and CTcolonography are not recommended for
screening or surveillance of UC-associated neoplasia because of
insufficient evidence.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
404
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Recommendations
47. We suggest colonoscopic screening and surveillance to identify
neoplasia in patients with UC of any extent beyond the rectum
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
48. When using standard-definition colonoscopes in patients with UC
undergoing surveillance, we recommend dye spray
chromoendoscopy with methylene blue or indigo carmine to
identify dysplasia (strong recommendation, low quality of
evidence).
49. When using high-definition colonoscopes in patients with UC
undergoing surveillance, we suggest white-light endoscopy with
narrow-band imaging or dye spray chromoendoscopy with
methylene blue or indigo carmine to identify dysplasia (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of evidence
CRC is a well-described complication
of chronic UC, and the risk factors include longer duration of
disease, increased inﬂammatory activity, younger age of di-
agnosis, greater extent of colonic inﬂammation, coexisting PSC,
and a family history of a ﬁrst-degree relative with CRC (229). The
longest maintained UC surveillance program at St. Mark’s Hos-
pital in the United Kingdom reports that the incidence rate of
CRC in patients with UC is 4.7 per 1,000 patient-years (208). A
meta-analysis of studies of risk factors and time trends identiﬁed
that over time, the risk of CRC in UC has been decreasing, with
the rates of advanced CRC and interval CRC steadily decreased
over the past 4 decades. In this analysis, the cumulative risks of
CRC in UC were estimated to be 1%, 2%, and 5% after 10, 20, and
.20 years of disease duration, respectively (230). Although
previously described as a risk factor, newer data suggest that in-
ﬂammatory pseudopolyps may not be a risk factor for CRC (231).
CRC in UC is believed to arise from dysplasia, which is the
unequivocal neoplastic transformation of the colonic epithelium.
The classical description of dysplasia in UC includes ﬂat,
spreading lesions rather than sessile or pedunculated polyps.
When ﬂat dysplasia in UC is conﬁrmed, historically, this has been
associated with a high rate of synchronous or metachronous
cancer. By contrast, discrete, polypoid, “adenoma-like” lesions
are likely associated with a low risk of CRC (232).
Identiﬁcationof the risks ofCRC in patients with UChas led to
strategies aimed at prevention, and the predominant approach
has been secondary prevention via colonoscopic screening and
surveillance. However, although this approach seems reasonable
and is postulated to be one of the reasons for the decreased in-
cidence of CRC in UC, there are a number of limitations in the
existing studies of CRC risk in UC. There are no prospective
studies of CRC prevention in UC that demonstrate reduction of
CRC incidence or death from CRC associated with surveillance
colonoscopy. In a retrospective study, the incidence of CRC was
signiﬁcantly higher (2.7%) in patients with UC without a recent
colonoscopy compared with 1.6% in those with a colonoscopy
within 3–36 months before diagnosis of CRC (233). A Cochrane
analysis of 3 small studies of UC-related cancer prevention did
not identify a signiﬁcant mortality beneﬁt (234). Nonetheless,
because of observations that the presence of classical dysplasia is
associated with concurrent or subsequent CRC, detection of
dysplasia has been used as the marker of successful screening/
surveillance and was accompanied by recommendations to per-
form proctocolectomy. This may in fact be a ﬂawed strategy be-
cause it is also possible that cancer rates are decreasing due to
better control of inﬂammation (reducing the primary risk of
neoplastic transformation) or access to surgery for medically
resistant disease (removing at-risk patients from these cohorts
earlier). Therefore, conclusions and recommendations about
cancer prevention in UC that are based on dysplasia detection
must be considered in the context of these limitations.
The timing of the ﬁrst screening examination and subsequent
surveillance intervals have not been prospectively determined.
Previous guidelines have suggested starting screening and sur-
veillance after 8–10 years of disease, but such models of screening
and risk assessment did not adequately adjust for degree of in-
ﬂammation or other confounding variables. More recent data
suggest that CRC may be occurring earlier in some patients, so
these guidelines have suggested starting screening after 8 years of
disease (235). The exception in all published guidelines has been
patients with concomitant PSC with UC, in which the increased
risk of CRC is so high that surveillance examinations should start
at the time of diagnosis of the UC and continue annually. This is
both to address the risk and because one of the theories for the
increased risk of CRC in UC/PSC is that the inﬂammatory activity
in UC isless severe, and patients mayhave had disease longer than
was previously known (236). More recently, increased histologic
activity of inﬂammation was described in the proximal colon in
such patients, providing some additional insights into these
observations and the importance of colonoscopic examination to
better monitor and survey (237).
For patients with UC without PSC, it is diﬃcult to better deﬁne
intervals required for colonoscopic surveillance because of the
lack of prospective studies. The intervals for surveillance exami-
nations should be chosen based on the natural history of cancer in
the at-risk individuals, the sensitivity of screening and surveil-
lance technology for the detection of precancerous ﬁndings, and
the risk factors for development of new neoplasia. A rational
approach to this challenge is to combine risk factors and adjust
the intervals based on the combination of risk factors, including
the degree of inﬂammation on the previous examination. Shorter
intervals are recommended for patients who have a greater
number of risk factors, and longer intervals between examina-
tions may be oﬀered to patients with fewer risk factors and in
whom the (histologic) inﬂammation is under excellent control. In
these guidelines, a range of intervals between 1 and 3 years is
suggested. Recent analyses that quantify risk over time from the
St. Mark’s surveillance program support this general approach
(238), but there are clearly insuﬃcient data to make more in-
formed recommendations at this time.
The approach to dysplasia detection has evolved along with
improvements in technology, and therefore, recommendations
for the detection of dysplasia are also updated (239). Historically,
because dysplasia in UC was not easily visible with ﬁber optic
colonoscope technology, recommendations were to perform
nontargeted (“random”) biopsies in a systematic and segmental
method to sample the mucosa. The belief was that when colitis-
associated neoplasia occurred, it was in the setting of a “ﬁeld ef-
fect” of at-risk mucosa, and segmental biopsies would identify
neoplastic change to allow for surgical intervention. Sub-
sequently, it was reported in retrospective studies of standard-
deﬁnition colonoscopes that most neoplasia was visible in the
majority of patients (240,241). With additional endoscopic
improvements and clinical studies, endoscopists now have the
ability to visualize mucosal abnormalities even at the level of pit
patterns of dysplastic crypts. In addition, utilization of dye spray
with either methylene blue or indigo carmine further improved
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
405
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
dysplasia detection. Multiple studies demonstrated that the use of
dye spray chromoendoscopy compared with standard-deﬁnition
colonoscopy detected a greater number of dysplastic lesions
(242). This led to publication of an international consensus
statement recommending dye spray chromoendoscopy over
white-light colonoscopy for surveillance in UC (229). This was
a strong recommendation compared with standard-deﬁnition
white-light colonoscopes and a conditional recommendation
compared with high-deﬁnition white-light colonoscopes (243).
Adoption of this recommendation was limited because of chal-
lenges in incorporation of the techniques, perception of increased
time and expense of examinations, and lack of training or expe-
rience by many gastroenterologists (244). Multiple studies have
demonstrated a low yield of the systematic nontargeted biopsies
and poor compliance with this approach, and a recent prospective
randomized trial in patients with UC found that targeted and
random biopsies detected similar proportions of neoplasia, but
the examination times in the targeted biopsy group were shorter
(41.7 vs 26.6 minutes, P , 0.001) (245). A single prospective
multicenter study in France of high-deﬁnition colonoscopies with
dye spray chromoendoscopy in combination with additional
random biopsies demonstrated a low yield of additional dysplasia
with the random biopsies (7 patients) that was separate from
those that were visible during chromoendoscopy and 12 patients
in whom no lesions were seen by chromoendoscopy but dysplasia
was found by random biopsies (246). No cancers were missed,
and no beneﬁt in cancer mortality was measured, so, in sum, the
evolution of enhanced visualization techniques suggests that
dysplasia detection by direct visualization and targeted biopsies is
safe and eﬃcient.
More recently, the widespread availability of higher-resolu-
tion colonoscopes and monitors has resulted in what is believed to
be greater visibility of neoplasia, and the utility of dye spray
chromoendoscopy has been questioned in this setting. A retro-
spective cohort study found similar numbers of dysplastic lesions
in patients who underwent white-light or dye spray chro-
moendoscopy examinations (247). Although previous studies of
narrow-band imaging with standard-deﬁnition and high-deﬁni-
tion colonoscopies did not demonstrate superior detection of
dysplasia compared with white light (248–250), a more recent
prospective randomized study using high-deﬁnition colono-
scopes demonstrated similar dysplasia detection between high-deﬁ-
nitioncolonoscopes using narrow-band imagingandhigh-deﬁnition
colonoscopes with dye spray chromoendoscopy (251), supporting
an approach that does not seem to require dye spray examinations
in patients with UC. However, once dysplasia is found, these
patients are at a higher risk of subsequent neoplasia and may
beneﬁtfromenhancedvisualizationintheirfollow-upexamination
(252,253). Alternately, if there is no evidence of dysplasia on
consecutive examinations or with dye spray chromoendoscopy,
there is a very low risk of advanced colorectal neoplasia on follow-
up (254–256). In these individuals, after consecutive negative
examinations, longer surveillance intervals in this selected pop-
ulation may be safe.
A critical component to a cancer prevention strategy focused
on dysplasia detection is accurate histopathologic diagnosis, and
several analyses have emphasized the importance of pathologists
with expertise reviewing suspected UC-associated neoplasia
(257). In particular, low-grade dysplasia and indeﬁnite dysplasia
have some diagnostic errors associated with them (258). Dis-
tinction between colitis-associated neoplasia and sporadic/age-
related neoplasia is not clear, especially when isolated dysplastic
lesions are found, but ﬂat dysplasia or “invisible” (deﬁned as
found on nontargeted biopsies) neoplasia is thought to be colitis
associated. The colitis-associated lesions are also more likely to be
ﬂat or spreading lesions rather than morphologically sessile or
pedunculated. Because of improvements in visualization, the
term “DALM” (dysplasia-associated lesion or mass) should no
longer be used to describe neoplasia. Instead, descriptive termi-
nology should be incorporated that characterizes the size, shape,
and pit patterns of the mucosa.
Patients with UC that has healed may develop inﬂammatory
polyps.Inﬂammatorypolyps,sometimescalled“pseudopolyps,”are
notprecancerous,butdistinctionbetweeninﬂammatorypolypsand
dysplastic polyps can be diﬃcult. Some patients may develop ex-
tensive pseudopolyposis, in which visualization of the intervening
mucosa can be diﬃcult or not possible. Because of this fact, an
approach to surveillance has not been clariﬁed. Therefore, patients
with pseudopolyposis should be informed that their surveillance
may not be adequate. More frequent surveillance examinations or
surgical resection of the aﬀected area may be required (259).
The general approach to a conﬁrmed neoplastic lesion in
a patient with UC has been surgical resection of the colorectum
with ileostomy or continent reservoir creation. The most com-
mon approach to this surgery is a 2- or 3-stage creation of con-
tinent reservoir IPAA. A stapled anastomosis provides better
functional outcomes than mucosectomy with a handsewn anas-
tomosis, so mucosectomy may be reserved for those patients with
neoplasia that involves the rectum and who have a higher risk of
recurrence in this region (260,261).
The evolution of technology and the ability to see neoplasia
has moved us away from recommending proctocolectomy for all
patients with any form of dysplasia. When discrete polypoid
lesions are discovered in patients with UC, if these can be com-
pletely resected, patients can be followed with ongoing surveil-
lance rather than surgery (262). One of the challenges in
UC-associated dysplasia detection is the patient with extensive
inﬂammatory polyps, in whom assessment or removal of the large
number of polyps is technically impossible and adequate in-
spection of the lesions and underlying mucosa for neoplasia is
hindered. In this situation, it may be prudent to advise the patient
of the technical diﬃculty and consider a surgical resection due to
inability to perform adequate surveillance (263).
Previous technical reviews suggested that after polypoid
lesions are resected in UC, biopsies of the ﬂat mucosa sur-
rounding the area should be obtained to conﬁrm that no residual
neoplasia is left in situ. With the newer enhanced visualization
techniques and technologies, this approach may not be necessary
in many patients (264–266). We now consider bowel-sparing
segmental or subtotal resections in select patients (those in deep
remission, those who are not good candidates for IPAA, and in
those where dysplasia is proximal and not involving the rec-
tum) (267).
Because the primary driver of cancer risk in UC seems to be
inﬂammation, there may be a role for primary prevention (che-
moprevention) of CRC by medical treatment of UC. Data from
various case-control and cohort studies have demonstrated
a protective eﬀect of medical therapies for development of dys-
plasia in UC, including 5-ASA therapies (268) and azathioprine
(269). However, these results have been inconsistent across
studies, and eﬀect sizes are less when adjustments for all con-
founders including degree of inﬂammation are included in the
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
406
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
analyses (9). Therefore, optimized medical therapy alone is not an
appropriate prevention method for CRC in patients with UC and
does not supplant colonoscopy. Using appropriate secondary
prevention (screening and surveillance) is necessary at this time
to prevent CRC in patients with long-standing UC.
CONCLUSIONS
UC is an idiopathic chronic inﬂammatory condition of the rec-
tum and colon, which presents with variable degrees of clinical
activity and severity and is associated with signiﬁcant morbidity.
The appropriate management of patients with UC involves suc-
cessful induction of both clinical and endoscopic remission, fol-
lowed by the use of a steroid-free maintenance strategy. Choice of
therapy for UC is based on activity, severity, extent of in-
ﬂammation, and prognostic factors and may include oral, topical
(rectal), or systemic therapies, as well as surgery. When possible
and appropriate based on individual clinical factors, organ-spe-
ciﬁc treatments can be used before systemic therapies. In general,
the induction therapy selected directs the choice of maintenance
therapy. Patients with UC are at an increased risk of CRC and
should undergo surveillance colonoscopy focused on identifying
and removing precancerous dysplasia. The evolution of tech-
nology has resulted in more directly visualized approaches, re-
moval of endoscopically discrete lesions, and in select patients,
active surveillance rather than proctocolectomy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This guideline was produced in collaboration with the Practice
Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology.
The Committee gives special thanks to Brian P. Bosworth, MD,
FACG, who served as guideline monitor for this article. The authors
thank Katia El Jurdi and Nada Zmeter for their assistance with
manuscript preparation.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Guarantor of the article: David T. Rubin, MD, FACG.
Speciﬁc author contributions: All authors were involved in drafting
and editing the manuscript. All authors approved the ﬁnal draft
submitted.
Financial support: No funding was received for this publication.
Potential competing interests: D.T.R.: consultant/advisory
board—AbbVie, Abgenomics, Allergan, Ferring, Genentech/Roche,
Janssen, Merck, Medtronic, Napo Pharmaceuticals, Pﬁzer, Shire,
Takeda, and Target Pharma Solutions; research support—Takeda.
A.N.A.: research support—National Institutes of Health, Crohn’s
and Colitis Foundation, and Pﬁzer; advisory board—Takeda and
Gilead. C.A.S.: consultant/advisory board—AbbVie, Amgen,
Celgene, Lilly, Janssen, Sandoz, Pﬁzer, Prometheus, Sebela, and
Takeda; speaker for CME activities—AbbVie, Janssen, Pﬁzer, and
Takeda; grant support—Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation, AHRQ
(1R01HS021747-01), AbbVie, Janssen, Pﬁzer, and Takeda. M.D.L.:
consultant—AbbVie, Takeda, Pﬁzer, UCB, Theravance, Target
Pharma Solutions, and Janssen; research support—Takeda and Pﬁzer.
REFERENCES
1.
Glickman JN, Odze RD. Does rectal sparing ever occur in ulcerative
colitis? Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2008;14:S166–7.
2.
Meyers S, Janowitz HD. The “natural history” of ulcerative colitis:
An analysis of the placebo response. J Clin Gastroenterol 1989;11:
33–7.
3.
Fumery M, Singh S, Dulai PS, et al. Natural history of adult ulcerative
colitis in population-based cohorts: A systematic review. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:343–56.
4.
BernsteinCN, NgSC, LakatosPL,etal. Areviewof mortalityand surgery
in ulcerative colitis: Milestonesof the seriousness of the disease. Inﬂamm
Bowel Dis 2013;19:2001–10.
5.
Jess T, Frisch M, Simonsen J. Trends in overall and cause-speciﬁc
mortality among patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease from 1982 to
2010. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11:43–8.
6.
Regueiro M, Greer JB, Szigethy E. Etiology and treatment of pain and
psychosocial issues in patients with inﬂammatory bowel diseases.
Gastroenterology 2017;152:430–9.
7.
Herrinton LJ, Liu L, Levin TR, et al. Incidence and mortality of colorectal
adenocarcinoma in persons with inﬂammatory bowel disease from 1998
to 2010. Gastroenterology 2012;143:382–9.
8.
Rutter M, Saunders B, Wilkinson K, et al. Severity of inﬂammation is
a risk factor for colorectal neoplasia in ulcerative colitis.
Gastroenterology 2004;126:451–9.
9.
Rubin DT, Huo D, Kinnucan JA, et al. Inﬂammation is an independent
risk factor for colonic neoplasia in patients with ulcerative colitis: A case-
control study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11:1601–8.
10.
Colman RJ, Rubin DT. Histological inﬂammation increases the risk of
colorectal neoplasia in ulcerative colitis: A systematic review. Intestinal
Res 2016;14:202–10.
11.
Bressler B, Marshall JK, Bernstein CN, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for the medical management of nonhospitalized ulcerative colitis: The
Toronto consensus. Gastroenterology 2015;148:1035–58.
12.
Farraye FA, Melmed GY, Lichtenstein GR, et al. ACG clinical guideline:
Preventive care in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol
2017;112:241–58.
13.
GuyattG,OxmanAD,Akl EA,etal.GRADEguidelines:1.Introduction-
GRADE evidence proﬁles and summary of ﬁndings tables. J Clin
Epidemiol 2011;64:383–94.
14.
Beaugerie L, Massot N, Carbonnel F, et al. Impact of cessation of
smoking on the course of ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:
2113–6.
15.
Takeuchi K, Smale S, Premchand P, et al. Prevalence and mechanism of
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-induced clinical relapse in
patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2006;4:196–202.
16.
Evans JM, McMahon AD, Murray FE, et al. Non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs are associated with emergency admission to
hospital for colitis due to inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gut 1997;40:
619–22.
17.
Singh S, GraﬀLA, Bernstein CN. Do NSAIDs, antibiotics, infections, or
stress trigger ﬂares in IBD? Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:1298–313.
18.
Ananthakrishnan AN, McGinley EL, Binion DG. Excess hospitalisation
burden associated with Clostridium diﬃcile in patients with
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gut 2008;57:205–10.
19.
Jen MH, Saxena S, Bottle A, et al. Increased health burden associated
with Clostridium diﬃcile diarrhoea in patients with inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2011;33:1322–31.
20.
Krishnarao A, de Leon L, Bright R, et al. Testing for Clostridium diﬃcile
in patients newly diagnosed with inﬂammatory bowel disease in
a community setting. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:564–9.
21.
Banaszkiewicz A, Kowalska-Duplaga K, Pytrus T, et al. Clostridium
diﬃcile infection in newly diagnosed pediatric patients with
inﬂammatory bowel disease: Prevalence and risk factors. Inﬂamm Bowel
Dis 2012;18:844–8.
22.
Surawicz CM, Brandt LJ, Binion DG, et al. Guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of Clostridium diﬃcile infections. Am J
Gastroenterol 2013;108:478–98.
23.
HanadaY, KhannaS, LoftusEV, etal.Non–Clostridiumdiﬃcile bacterial
infections are rare in patients with ﬂares of inﬂammatory bowel disease.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:528–33.
24.
Turner D, Levine A, Escher JC, et al. Management of pediatric ulcerative
colitis: Joint ECCO and ESPGHAN evidence-based consensus
guidelines. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2012;55:340–61.
25.
de Bie CI, Buderus S, Sandhu BK, et al. Diagnostic workup of paediatric
patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease in Europe: Results of a 5-year
audit of the EUROKIDS registry. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2012;54:
374–80.
26.
Parente F, Molteni P, Bollani S, et al. Prevalence of Helicobacter pylori
infection and related upper gastrointestinal lesions in patients with
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
407
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
inﬂammatory bowel diseases: A cross-sectional study with matching.
Scand J Gastroenterol 1997;32:1140–6.
27.
Ushiku T, Moran CJ, Lauwers GY. Focally enhanced gastritis in newly
diagnosed pediatric inﬂammatory bowel disease. Am J Surg Pathol 2013;
37:1882–8.
28.
Sands BE. Biomarkers of inﬂammation in inﬂammatory bowel disease.
Gastroenterology 2015;149:1275–85.
29.
Turner D, Mack DR, Hyams J, et al. C-reactive protein (CRP),
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or both? A systematic evaluation
in pediatric ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2011;5:423–9.
30.
Yoon JY, Park SJ, Hong SP, et al. Correlations of C-reactive protein levels
and erythrocyte sedimentation rates with endoscopic activity indices in
patients with ulcerative colitis. Dig Dis Sci 2014;59:829–37.
31.
Solberg IC, Hoivik ML, Cvancarova M, et al. Risk matrix model for
prediction of colectomy in a population-based study of ulcerative colitis
patients (the IBSEN study). Scand J Gastroenterol 2015;50:1456–62.
32.
Travis SP, Farrant JM, Ricketts C, et al. Predicting outcome in severe
ulcerative colitis. Gut 1996;38:905–10.
33.
Ferrante M, Vermeire S, Fidder H, et al. Long-term outcome after
inﬂiximab for refractory ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2008;2:219–25.
34.
Roblin X, Marotte H, Leclerc M, et al. Combination of C-reactive
protein, inﬂiximab trough levels, and stable but not transient antibodies
to inﬂiximab are associated with loss of response to inﬂiximab in
inﬂammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 2015;9:525–31.
35.
Mosli MH, Zou G, Garg SK, et al. C-reactive protein, fecal calprotectin,
and stool lactoferrin for detection of endoscopic activity in symptomatic
inﬂammatory bowel disease patients: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110:802–19.
36.
Turvill J, O’Connell S, Brooks A, et al. Evaluation of a faecal calprotectin
care pathway for use in primary care. Prim Health Care Res Dev 2016;17:
428–36.
37.
Holtman GA, Lisman-van Leeuwen Y, Day AS, et al. Use of laboratory
markers in addition to symptoms for diagnosis of inﬂammatory bowel
disease in children: A meta-analysis of individual patient data. JAMA
Pediatr 2017;171:984–91.
38.
Travis SP, Schnell D, Krzeski P, et al. Developing an instrument to assess
the endoscopic severity of ulcerative colitis: The Ulcerative Colitis
Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS). Gut 2012;61:535–42.
39.
Plevy S, Silverberg MS, Lockton S, et al. Combined serological, genetic,
and inﬂammatory markers diﬀerentiate non-IBD, Crohn’s disease, and
ulcerative colitis patients. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:1139–48.
40.
Kevans D, Waterman M, Milgrom R, et al. Serological markers
associated with disease behavior and response to anti-tumor necrosis
factor therapy in ulcerative colitis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;30:
64–70.
41.
Waterman M, Knight J, Dinani A, et al. Predictors of outcome in
ulcerative colitis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:2097–105.
42.
Satsangi J, Silverberg MS, Vermeire S, et al. The Montreal classiﬁcation
of inﬂammatory bowel disease: Controversies, consensus, and
implications. Gut 2006;55:749–53.
43.
Silverberg MS, Satsangi J, Ahmad T, et al. Toward an integrated clinical,
molecular and serological classiﬁcation of inﬂammatory bowel disease:
Report of a working party of the 2005 Montreal World Congress of
Gastroenterology. Can J Gastroenterol 2005;19(Suppl A):5A–36A.
44.
Truelove SC, Witts LJ. Cortisone in ulcerative colitis; ﬁnal report on
a therapeutic trial. Br Med J 1955;2:1041–8.
45.
de Jong MJ, Huibregtse R, Masclee AAM, et al. Patient-reported
outcome measures for use in clinical trials and clinical practice in
inﬂammatory bowel diseases: A systematic review. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2018;16:648–63.e3.
46.
Schroeder KW, Tremaine WJ, Ilstrup DM. Coated oral 5-aminosalicylic
acid therapy for mildly to moderately active ulcerative colitis: A
randomized study. N Engl J Med 1987;317:1625–9.
47.
Seo M,Okada M,YaoT, etal.An indexof diseaseactivityin patients with
ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 1992;87:971–6.
48.
Rachmilewitz D. Coated mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic acid) versus
sulphasalazine in the treatment of active ulcerative colitis: A randomised
trial. BMJ 1989;298:82–6.
49.
Walmsley RS, Ayres RC, Pounder RE, et al. A Simple Clinical Colitis
Activity Index. Gut 1998;43:29–32.
50.
Jairath V, Khanna R, Zou GY, et al. Development of interim patient-
reported outcome measures for the assessment of ulcerative colitis
disease activity in clinical trials. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42:
1200–10.
51.
Turner D, Seow CH, Greenberg GR, et al. A systematic prospective
comparison of noninvasive disease activity indices in ulcerative colitis.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009;7:1081–8.
52.
Walsh AJ, Ghosh A, Brain AO, et al. Comparing disease activity indices
in ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2014;8:318–25.
53.
D’Haens G, Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, et al. A review of activity indices
and eﬃcacy end points for clinical trialsof medical therapy in adults with
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2007;132:763–86.
54.
Turner D, Otley AR, Mack D, et al. Development, validation, and
evaluation of a Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis Activity Index: A prospective
multicenter study. Gastroenterology 2007;133:423–32.
55.
Bewtra M, Brensinger CM, Tomov VT, et al. An optimized patient-
reported ulcerative colitis disease activity measure derived from the
Mayo score and the Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index. Inﬂamm
Bowel Dis 2014;20:1070–8.
56.
Christensen B, Hanauer SB, Erlich J, et al. Histologic normalization
occurs in ulcerative colitis and is associated with improved clinical
outcomes. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:1557–64.e1.
57.
Froslie KF, Jahnsen J, Moum BA, et al. Mucosal healing in inﬂammatory
bowel disease: Results from a Norwegian population-based cohort.
Gastroenterology 2007;133:412–22.
58.
Colombel JF, Rutgeerts P, Reinisch W, et al. Early mucosal healing with
inﬂiximab is associated with improved long-term clinical outcomes in
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2011;141:1194–201.
59.
Samaan MA, Mosli MH, Sandborn WJ, et al. A systematic review of the
measurement of endoscopic healing in ulcerative colitis clinical trials:
Recommendations and implications for future research. Inﬂamm Bowel
Dis 2014;20:1465–71.
60.
Travis SP, Schnell D, Krzeski P, et al. Reliability and initial validation of
the Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity. Gastroenterology
2013;145:987–95.
61.
TravisSP, Schnell D, FeaganBG, etal. The impactof clinical information
on the assessment of endoscopic activity: Characteristics of the
Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS). J Crohns
Colitis 2015;9:607–16.
62.
Ikeya K, Hanai H, Sugimoto K, et al. The Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic
Index of Severity more accurately reﬂects clinical outcomes and long-
term prognosis than the Mayo endoscopic score. J Crohns Colitis 2016;
10:286–95.
63.
Siegel CA, Whitman CB, Spiegel BMR, et al. Development of an index to
deﬁne overall disease severity in IBD. Gut 2018;67:244–54.
64.
Allen PB, Kamm MA, Peyrin-Biroulet L, et al. Development and
validation of a patient-reported disability measurement tool for patients
with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;37:
438–44.
65.
Peyrin-Biroulet L, Cieza A, Sandborn WJ, et al. Development of the ﬁrst
disability index for inﬂammatory bowel disease based on the
international classiﬁcation of functioning, disability and health. Gut
2012;61:241–7.
66.
Hawthorne AB, Rubin G, Ghosh S. Review article: Medication non-
adherence in ulcerative colitis—Strategies to improve adherence with
mesalazine and other maintenance therapies. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2008;27:1157–66.
67.
Kane SV. Systematic review: Adherence issues in the treatment of
ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;23:577–85.
68.
Farmer RG, Easley KA, Rankin GB. Clinical patterns, natural history,
and progression of ulcerative colitis: A long-term follow-up of 1116
patients. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:1137–46.
69.
Monstad I, Hovde O, Solberg IC, et al. Clinical course and prognosis in
ulcerative colitis: Results from population-based and observational
studies. Ann Gastroenterol 2014;27:95–104.
70.
Peyrin-Biroulet L, Panes J, Sandborn WJ, et al. Deﬁning disease severity
in inﬂammatory bowel diseases: Current and future directions. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;14:348–54.
71.
Solberg IC, Lygren I, Jahnsen J, et al. Clinical course during the ﬁrst
10 years of ulcerative colitis: Results from a population-based
inception cohort (IBSEN study). Scand J Gastroenterol 2009;44:
431–40.
72.
Ananthakrishnan AN, Issa M, Beaulieu DB, et al. History of medical
hospitalization predicts future need for colectomy in patients with
ulcerative colitis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2009;15:176–81.
73.
Rubin DT, Siegel CA, Kane SV, et al. Impact of ulcerative colitis from
patients’ and physicians’ perspectives: Results from the UC: NORMAL
survey. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2009;15:581–8.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
408
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
74.
Rutgeerts P, Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, et al. Inﬂiximab for induction
and maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:
2462–76.
75.
Rosenberg L, Lawlor GO, Zenlea T, et al. Predictors of endoscopic
inﬂammation in patients with ulcerative colitis in clinical remission.
Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:779–84.
76.
Baars JE, Nuij VJ, Oldenburg B, et al. Majority of patients with
inﬂammatory bowel disease in clinical remission have mucosal
inﬂammation. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2012;18:1634–40.
77.
Levesque BG, Sandborn WJ, Ruel J, et al. Converging goals of treatment
of inﬂammatory bowel disease from clinical trials and practice.
Gastroenterology 2015;148:37–51 e1.
78.
Bouguen G, Levesque BG, Feagan BG, et al. Treat to target: A proposed
new paradigm for the management of Crohn’s disease. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:1042–50 e2.
79.
Peyrin-Biroulet L, Sandborn W, Sands BE, et al. Selecting Therapeutic
Targets in Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease (STRIDE): Determining
therapeutic goals for treat-to-target. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110:
1324–38.
80.
Carbonnel F, Lavergne A, Lemann M, et al. Colonoscopy of acute colitis:
A safe and reliable tool for assessment of severity. Dig Dis Sci 1994;39:
1550–7.
81.
Pai RK, Jairath V, Vande Casteele N, et al. The emerging role of
histologic disease activity assessment in ulcerative colitis. Gastrointest
Endosc 2018;88:887–98.
82.
Shi HY, Chan FKL, Chan AWH, et al. Accuracy of faecal
immunochemical test to predict endoscopic and histological healing in
ulcerative colitis: A prospective study based on validated histological
scores. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:1071–7.
83.
Lehmann FS, Burri E, Beglinger C. The role and utility of faecal markers
in inﬂammatory boweldisease. TherapAdvGastroenterol2015;8:23–36.
84.
Sandborn WJ, Panes J, Zhang H, et al. Correlation between
concentrations of fecal calprotectin and outcomes of patients with
ulcerative colitis in a phase 2 trial. Gastroenterology 2016;150:96–102.
85.
Theede K, Holck S, Ibsen P, et al. Level of fecal calprotectin correlates
with endoscopic and histologic inﬂammation and identiﬁes patients
with mucosal healing of ulcerative colitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2015;13:1929–36.
86.
De Vos M, Dewit O, D’Haens G, et al. Fast and sharp decrease in
calprotectin predicts remission by inﬂiximab in anti-TNF naive patients
with ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2012;6:557–62.
87.
Costa F, Mumolo MG, Ceccarelli L, et al. Calprotectin is a stronger
predictive marker of relapse in ulcerative colitis than in Crohn’s disease.
Gut 2005;54:364–8.
88.
Patel A, Panchal H, Dubinsky MC. Fecal calprotectin levels predict
histological healing in ulcerative colitis. Inﬂammatory Bowel Dis 2017;
23:1600–4.
89.
Lee SH, Kim MJ, Chang K, et al. Fecal calprotectin predicts complete
mucosal healing and better correlates with the Ulcerative Colitis
EndoscopicIndexofSeveritythanwith theMayoendoscopicsubscore in
patients with ulcerative colitis. BMC Gastroenterol 2017;17:110.
90.
Kristensen V, Malmstrom GH, Skar V, et al. Clinical importance of
faecal calprotectin variability in inﬂammatory bowel disease: Intra-
individual variability and standardisation of sampling procedure. Scand
J Gastroenterol 2016;51:548–55.
91.
Theede K, Holck S, Ibsen P, et al. Fecal Calprotectin predicts relapse and
histological mucosal healing in ulcerative colitis. Inﬂammatory Bowel
Dis 2016;22:1042–8.
92.
Rokkas T, Portincasa P, Koutroubakis IE. Fecal calprotectin in assessing
inﬂammatory bowel disease endoscopic activity: A diagnostic accuracy
meta-analysis. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis 2018;27:299–306.
93.
Mak WY, Buisson A, Andersen MJ Jr, et al. Fecal calprotectin in
assessing endoscopic and histological remission in patients with
ulcerative colitis. Dig Dis Sci 2018;63:1294–301.
94.
Ford AC, Achkar JP, Khan KJ, et al. Eﬃcacy of 5-aminosalicylates in
ulcerative colitis: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106:601–16.
95.
Marshall JK, Thabane M, Steinhart AH, et al. Rectal 5-aminosalicylic
acid for induction of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2010:CD004115.
96.
Ford AC, Khan KJ, Achkar JP, et al. Eﬃcacy of oral vs. topical, or
combined oral and topical 5-aminosalicylates, in ulcerative colitis:
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2012;107:
167–76; author reply 177.
97.
Feagan BG, Macdonald JK. Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid for induction of
remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;10:
CD000543.
98.
Sandborn WJ, Travis S, Moro L, et al. Once-daily budesonide MMX(R)
extended-release tablets induce remission in patients with mild to
moderate ulcerative colitis: Results from the CORE I study.
Gastroenterology 2012;143:1218–26.e1–2.
99.
Wang Y, Parker CE, Bhanji T, et al. Oral 5–aminosalicylic acid for
induction of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2016;4:CD000543.
100. Feagan BG, Chande N, MacDonald JK. Are there any diﬀerences in the
eﬃcacy and safety of diﬀerent formulations of oral 5-ASA used for
induction and maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis? Evidence
from cochrane reviews. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:2031–40.
101. Feagan BG, Macdonald JK. Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid for maintenance
of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;10:
CD000544.
102. Ford AC, Bernstein CN, Khan KJ, et al. Glucocorticosteroid therapy in
inﬂammatory bowel disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106:590–9; quiz 600.
103. Turner D, Walsh CM, Steinhart AH, et al. Response to corticosteroids in
severe ulcerative colitis: A systematic review of the literature and a meta-
regression. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2007;5:103–10.
104. Rubin DT, Cohen RD, Sandborn WJ, et al. Budesonide multimatrix is
eﬃcacious for mesalamine-refractory, mild to moderate ulcerative
colitis: A randomised, placebo-controlled trial. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:
785–91.
105. Feagan BG, MacDonald JK. Once daily oral mesalamine compared to
conventional dosing for induction and maintenance of remission in
ulcerative colitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Inﬂamm Bowel
Dis 2012;18:1785–94.
106. Kane SV, Cohen RD, Aikens JE, et al. Prevalence of nonadherence with
maintenance mesalamine in quiescent ulcerative colitis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2001;96:2929–33.
107. Kruis W, Kiudelis G, Racz I, et al. Once daily versus three times daily
mesalazine granules in active ulcerative colitis: A double-blind, double-
dummy, randomised, non-inferiority trial. Gut 2009;58:233–40.
108. Derwa Y, Gracie DJ, Hamlin PJ, et al. Systematic review with meta-
analysis: The eﬃcacy of probiotics in inﬂammatory bowel disease.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;46:389–400.
109. Tursi A, Brandimarte G, Papa A, et al. Treatment of relapsing mild-to-
moderate ulcerative colitis with the probiotic VSL#3 as adjunctive to
a standard pharmaceutical treatment: A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:2218–27.
110. Jonkers D, Penders J, Masclee A, et al. Probiotics in the management of
inﬂammatory bowel disease: A systematic review of intervention studies
in adult patients. Drugs 2012;72:803–23.
111. Petersen AM, Mirsepasi H, Halkjær SI, et al. Ciproﬂoxacin and probiotic
Escherichia coli Nissle add-on treatment in active ulcerative colitis: A
double-blind randomized placebo controlled clinical trial. J Crohns
Colitis 2014;8:1498–505.
112. MoayyediP, Surette MG, Kim PT, et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation
induces remission in patients with active ulcerative colitis in
a randomized controlled trial. Gastroenterology 2015;149:102–9.e6.
113. Rossen NG, Fuentes S, van der Spek MJ, et al. Findings from
a randomized controlled trial of fecal transplantation for patients with
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2015;149:110–8.e4.
114. Paramsothy S, Kamm MA, Kaakoush NO, et al. Multidonor intensive
faecal microbiota transplantation for active ulcerative colitis: A
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2017;389:1218–28.
115. Paramsothy S, Paramsothy R, Rubin DT, et al. Faecal microbiota
transplantation for inﬂammatory bowel disease: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:1180–99.
116. Ford AC, Khan KJ, Sandborn WJ, et al. Eﬃcacy of topical 5-
aminosalicylates in preventing relapse of quiescent ulcerative colitis: A
meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10:513–9.
117. Taylor K, Gibson PR. Conventional therapy of ulcerative colitis:
Corticosteroids. In Baumgart DC (ed). Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative
Colitis: From Epidemiology and Immunobiology to a Rational
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approach. Springer International
Publishing: Cham, 2017, pp 399–412.
118. Lennard-Jones JE, Misiewicz JJ, Connell AM, et al. Prednisone as
maintenance treatment for ulcerative colitis in remission. Lancet 1965;1:
188–9.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
409
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
119. Truelove SC, Witts LJ. Cortisone and corticotrophin in ulcerative colitis.
Br Med J 1959;1:387–94.
120. Lichtenstein GR, Feagan BG, Cohen RD, et al. Serious infection and
mortality in patients with Crohn’s disease: More than 5 years of follow-
up in the TREAT registry. Am J Gastroenterol 2012;107:1409–22.
121. TravisSP, Danese S, Kupcinskas L, etal. Once-dailybudesonide MMXin
active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis: Results from the randomised
CORE II study. Gut 2014;63:433–41.
122. Jewell DP, Truelove SC. Azathioprine in ulcerative colitis: Final report
on controlled therapeutic trial. Br Med J 1974;4:627–30.
123. Khan KJ, Dubinsky MC, Ford AC, et al. Eﬃcacy of immunosuppressive
therapy for inﬂammatory bowel disease: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106:630–42.
124. Sood A, Midha V, Sood N, et al. Role of azathioprine in severe ulcerative
colitis: One-year, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Indian J
Gastroenterol 2000;19:14–6.
125. Chande N, Wang Y, MacDonald JK, et al. Methotrexate for induction of
remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;8:
CD006618.
126. Carbonnel F, Colombel JF, Filippi J, et al. Methotrexate is not superior to
placebo for inducing steroid-free remission, but induces steroid-free
clinical remission in a larger proportion of patients with ulcerative
colitis. Gastroenterology 2016;150:380–8.e4.
127. Ford AC, Sandborn WJ, Khan KJ, et al. Eﬃcacy of biological therapies in
inﬂammatory bowel disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106:644–59.
128. Danese S, Fiorino G, Peyrin-Biroulet L, et al. Biological agents for
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis: A systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2014;160:704–11.
129. Stidham RW, Lee TC, Higgins PD, et al. Systematic review with network
meta-analysis: The eﬃcacy of anti-tumour necrosis factor-alpha agents
for the treatment of ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014;39:
660–71.
130. Sandborn WJ, van Assche G, Reinisch W, et al. Adalimumab induces
and maintains clinical remission in patients with moderate-to-severe
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2012;142:257–65.
131. Panaccione R, Ghosh S, Middleton S, et al. Combination therapy with
inﬂiximab and azathioprine is superior to monotherapy with either
agent in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2014;146:392–400.e3.
132. Colombel JF, Sandborn WJ, Reinisch W, et al. Inﬂiximab, azathioprine,
or combination therapy for Crohn’s disease. N Engl J Med 2010;362:
1383–95.
133. Singh S, AndersenNN, AnderssonM, etal. Higherrisk of hospitalization
and serious infection among patients with ulcerative colitis treated with
adalimumab, compared with inﬂiximab, in a nationwide study. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:1218–25.e7.
134. Singh S, Heien HC, Sangaralingham LR, et al. Comparative eﬀectiveness
and safety of inﬂiximab and adalimumab in patients with ulcerative
colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;43:994–1003.
135. Feagan BG, Rutgeerts P, Sands BE, et al. Vedolizumab as induction and
maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2013;369:
699–710.
136. Feagan BG, Rubin DT, Danese S, et al. Eﬃcacy of vedolizumab induction
and maintenance therapy in patients with ulcerative colitis, regardless of
prior exposure to tumor necrosis factor antagonists. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2017;15:229–39.
137. Mosli MH, MacDonald JK, Bickston SJ, et al. Vedolizumab for induction
and maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis: A cochrane systematic
review and meta-analysis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:1151–9.
138. Bickston SJ, Behm BW, Tsoulis DJ, et al. Vedolizumab for induction and
maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2014;8:CD007571.
139. Sandborn WJ, Su C, Sands BE, et al. Tofacitinib as induction and
maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2017;376:
1723–36.
140. Gisbert JP, Pan´es J. Loss of response and requirement of inﬂiximab dose
intensiﬁcationin Crohn’s disease:A review.Am J Of Gastroenterol 2009;
104:760.
141. Billioud V, Sandborn WJ, Peyrin-Biroulet L. Loss of response and need
for adalimumab dose intensiﬁcation in Crohn’s disease: A systematic
review. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106:674–84.
142. Ordas I, Mould DR, Feagan BG, et al. Anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies
in inﬂammatory bowel disease: Pharmacokinetics-based dosing
paradigms. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:635–46.
143. Brandse JF, Mathot RA, van der Kleij D, et al. Pharmacokinetic features
and presence of antidrug antibodies associate with response to
inﬂiximab induction therapy in patients with moderate to severe
ulcerative colitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:251–8.
144. Aﬁf W, Loftus EV Jr, Faubion WA, et al. Clinical utility of measuring
inﬂiximab and human anti-chimeric antibody concentrations in
patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:
1133–9.
145. Yarur AJ, Rubin DT. Therapeutic drug monitoring of anti-tumor
necrosis factor agents in patients with inﬂammatory bowel diseases.
Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:1709–18.
146. Christensen B, Colman RJ, Micic D, et al. Vedolizumab as induction and
maintenance for inﬂammatory bowel disease: 12-month eﬀectiveness
and safety. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2018;24:849–60.
147. Singh S, Proudfoot JA, Dulai PS, et al. No beneﬁt of concomitant 5-
aminosalicylates in patients with ulcerative colitis escalated to biologic
therapy: Pooled analysis of individual participant data from clinical
trials. Am J Gastroenterol 2018;113:1197–205.
148. Gisbert JP, Linares PM, McNicholl AG, et al. Meta-analysis: The eﬃcacy
of azathioprine and mercaptopurine in ulcerative colitis. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2009;30:126–37.
149. Timmer A, McDonald JW, Tsoulis DJ, et al. Azathioprine and 6-
mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;9:CD000478.
150. Wang Y, MacDonald JK, Vandermeer B, et al. Methotrexate for
maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2015;8:CD007560.
151. Herfarth H, Barnes EL, Valentine JF, et al. Methotrexate is not superior
to placebo in maintaining steroid-free response or remission in
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2018;155:1098–108.e9.
152. FDA.gov. FDA Brieﬁng Document Gastrointestinal Drug Advisory
Committee Meeting Volume. (https://www.fda.gov/downloads/
AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/
GastrointestinalDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM599512.pdf).
Accessed on September 17, 2018.
153. Edwards FC, Truelove SC. The course and prognosis of ulcerative colitis.
Gut 1963;4:299–315.
154. Dinesen LC, Walsh AJ, Protic MN, et al. The pattern and outcome of
acute severe colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2010;4:431–7.
155. Bojic D, Radojicic Z, Nedeljkovic-Protic M, et al. Long-term outcome
after admission for acute severe ulcerative colitis in Oxford: The 1992-
1993 cohort. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2009;15:823–8.
156. Issa M, Vijayapal A, Graham MB, et al. Impact of Clostridium diﬃcile on
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2007;5:345–51.
157. Jodorkovsky D, Young Y, Abreu MT. Clinical outcomes of patients with
ulcerative colitis and co-existing Clostridium diﬃcile infection. Dig Dis
Sci 2010;55:415–20.
158. Navaneethan U, Mukewar S, Venkatesh PG, et al. Clostridium diﬃcile
infection is associated with worse long term outcome in patients with
ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2012;6:330–6.
159. Murthy SK, Steinhart AH, Tinmouth J, et al. Impact of Clostridium
diﬃcile colitis on 5-year health outcomes in patients with ulcerative
colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2012;36:1032–9.
160. Ananthakrishnan AN, Issa M, Binion DG. Clostridium diﬃcile and
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Med Clin North Am 2010;94:135–53.
161. Schneeweiss S, Korzenik J, Solomon DH, et al. Inﬂiximab and other
immunomodulating drugs in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease
and the risk of serious bacterial infections. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2009;30:253–64.
162. McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for Clostridium diﬃcile infection in adults and children: 2017 update by
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis 2018;66:
e1–48.
163. Corte C, Fernandopulle N, Catuneanu AM, et al. Association between
the Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of Severity (UCEIS) and
outcomes in acute severe ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2015;9:
376–81.
164. Xie T, Zhang T, Ding C, et al. Ulcerative Colitis Endoscopic Index of
Severity (UCEIS) versus Mayo Endoscopic Score (MES) in guiding the
need for colectomy in patients with acute severe colitis. Gastroenterol
Rep (Oxf) 2018;6:38–44.
165. Lawlor G, Moss AC. Cytomegalovirus in inﬂammatory bowel disease:
Pathogen or innocent bystander? Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2010;16:1620–7.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
410
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
166. Sager K, Alam S, Bond A, et al. Review article: Cytomegalovirus and
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;41:725–33.
167. McCurdy JD, Jones A, Enders FT, et al. A model for identifying
cytomegalovirus in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:131–7.
168. Kambham N, Vij R, Cartwright CA, et al. Cytomegalovirus infection in
steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis: A case-control study. Am J Surg
Pathol 2004;28:365–73.
169. Chew CN, Nolan DJ, Jewell DP. Small bowel gas in severe ulcerative
colitis. Gut 1991;32:1535–7.
170. Turner D, Mack D, Leleiko N, et al. Severe pediatric ulcerative colitis: A
prospective multicenter study of outcomes and predictors of response.
Gastroenterology 2010;138:2282–91.
171. Ho GT, Mowat C, Goddard CJ, et al. Predicting the outcome of severe
ulcerative colitis: Development of a novel risk score to aid early selection
of patients for second-line medical therapy or surgery. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:1079–87.
172. Benazzato L, D’Inca R, Grigoletto F, et al. Prognosis of severe attacks in
ulcerative colitis: Eﬀect of intensive medical treatment. Dig Liver Dis
2004;36:461–6.
173. Nelson R, Liao C, Fichera A, et al. Rescue therapy with cyclosporine or
inﬂiximab is not associated with an increased risk for postoperative
complications in patients hospitalized for severe steroid-refractory
ulcerative colitis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2014;20:14–20.
174. Scoville EA, Konijeti GG, Nguyen DD, et al. Venous thromboembolism
in patients with inﬂammatory bowel diseases: A case-control study of
risk factors. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2014;20:631–6.
175. Nguyen GC, Bernstein CN, Bitton A, et al. Consensus statements on the
risk, prevention, and treatment of venous thromboembolism in
inﬂammatory bowel disease: Canadian Association of Gastroenterology.
Gastroenterology 2014;146:835–48.
176. Nguyen GC, Sam J. Rising prevalence of venous thromboembolism and
its impact on mortality among hospitalized inﬂammatory bowel disease
patients. Am J Gastroenterol 2008;103:2272–80.
177. Grainge MJ, West J, Card TR. Venous thromboembolism during active
disease and remission in inﬂammatory bowel disease: A cohort study.
Lancet 2010;375:657–63.
178. Kappelman MD, Horvath-Puho E, Sandler RS, et al. Thromboembolic
risk among Danish children and adults with inﬂammatory bowel
diseases: A population-based nationwide study. Gut 2011;60:937–43.
179. MurthySK,NguyenGC.Venousthromboembolismininﬂammatorybowel
disease: An epidemiological review. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106:713–8.
180. Ra G, Thanabalan R, Ratneswaran S, et al. Predictors and safety of
venous thromboembolism prophylaxis among hospitalized
inﬂammatory bowel disease patients. J Crohns Colitis 2013;7:e479–85.
181. Ananthakrishnan AN, Cagan A, Gainer VS, et al. Thromboprophylaxis
is associated with reduced post-hospitalization venous thromboembolic
events in patients with inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2014;12:1905–10.
182. Alikhan R, Forster R, Cohen AT. Heparin for the prevention of venous
thromboembolism in acutely ill medical patients (excluding stroke and
myocardial infarction). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD003747.
183. Chapman RW, Selby WS, Jewell DP. Controlled trial of intravenous
metronidazole asan adjunctto corticosteroidsin severeulcerativecolitis.
Gut 1986;27:1210–2.
184. Mantzaris GJ, Hatzis A, Kontogiannis P, et al. Intravenous tobramycin
and metronidazole as an adjunct to corticosteroids in acute, severe
ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:43–6.
185. Mantzaris GJ, Petraki K, Archavlis E, et al. A prospective randomized
controlled trial of intravenous ciproﬂoxacin as an adjunct to
corticosteroids in acute, severe ulcerative colitis. Scand J Gastroenterol
2001;36:971–4.
186. Dickinson RJ, O’Connor HJ, Pinder I, et al. Double blind controlled trial
of oral vancomycin as adjunctive treatment in acute exacerbations of
idiopathic colitis. Gut 1985;26:1380–4.
187. McIntyre PB, Powell-Tuck J, Wood SR, et al. Controlled trial of bowel
rest in the treatment of severe acute colitis. Gut 1986;27:481–5.
188. Dickinson RJ, Ashton MG, Axon AT, et al. Controlled trial of
intravenous hyperalimentation and total bowel rest as an adjunct to the
routine therapy of acute colitis. Gastroenterology 1980;79:1199–204.
189. Truelove SC, Jewell DP. Intensive intravenous regimen for severe attacks
of ulcerative colitis. Lancet 1974;1:1067–70.
190. Bossa F, Fiorella S, Caruso N, et al. Continuous infusion versus
bolus administration of steroids in severe attacks of ulcerative
colitis: A randomized, double-blind trial. Am J Gastroenterol 2007;
102:601–8.
191. Lichtiger S, Present DH, Kornbluth A, et al. Cyclosporine in severe
ulcerative colitis refractory to steroid therapy. N Engl J Med 1994;330:
1841–5.
192. Campbell S, Ghosh S. Combination immunomodulatory therapy with
cyclosporine and azathioprine in corticosteroid-resistant severe
ulcerative colitis: The Edinburgh experience of outcome. Dig Liver Dis
2003;35:546–51.
193. Campbell S, Travis S, Jewell D. Ciclosporin use in acute ulcerative colitis:
A long-term experience. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;17:79–84.
194. Moskovitz DN, Van Assche G, Maenhout B, et al. Incidence of
colectomy during long-term follow-up after cyclosporine-induced
remission of severe ulcerative colitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006;4:
760–5.
195. WalchA, MeshkatM, VogelsangH, et al. Long-termoutcome in patients
with ulcerative colitis treated with intravenous cyclosporine A is
determined bypreviousexposuretothiopurines.JCrohnsColitis2010;4:
398–404.
196. Cheifetz AS, Stern J, Garud S, et al. Cyclosporine is safe and eﬀective in
patientswithsevere ulcerative colitis.JClin Gastroenterol2011;45:107–12.
197. Van Assche G, D’Haens G, Noman M, et al. Randomized, double-blind
comparison of 4 mg/kg versus 2 mg/kg intravenous cyclosporine in
severe ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2003;125:1025–31.
198. Cohen RD, Stein R, Hanauer SB. Intravenous cyclosporin in ulcerative
colitis: A ﬁve-year experience. Am J Of Gastroenterol 1999;94:1587–92.
199. Christensen B, Gibson PR, Micic D, et al. Safety and eﬃcacy of
combination treatment with calcineurin inhibitors and vedolizumab in
patients with refractory inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2019;17:486–93.
200. D’Haens G, Lemmens L, Geboes K, et al. Intravenous cyclosporine
versus intravenous corticosteroids as single therapy for severe attacks of
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2001;120:1323–9.
201. Sands BE, Tremaine WJ, Sandborn WJ, et al. Inﬂiximab in the treatment
of severe, steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis: A pilot study. Inﬂamm
Bowel Dis 2001;7:83–8.
202. Jarnerot G, Hertervig E, Friis-Liby I, et al. Inﬂiximab as rescue therapy in
severe to moderately severe ulcerative colitis: A randomized, placebo-
controlled study. Gastroenterology 2005;128:1805–11.
203. Gustavsson A, Jarnerot G, Hertervig E, et al. Clinical trial: Colectomy
after rescue therapy in ulcerative colitis—3-year follow-up of the
Swedish-Danish controlled inﬂiximab study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2010;32:984–9.
204. Bressler B, Law JK, Al Nahdi Sheraisher N, et al. The use of inﬂiximab for
treatment of hospitalized patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis.
Can J Gastroenterol 2008;22:937–40.
205. Halpin SJ, Hamlin PJ, Greer DP, et al. Eﬃcacy of inﬂiximab in acute
severe ulcerative colitis: A single-centre experience. World J
Gastroenterol 2013;19:1091–7.
206. Sjoberg M, Magnuson A, Bjork J, et al. Inﬂiximab as rescue therapy in
hospitalised patients with steroid-refractory acute ulcerative colitis: A
long-term follow-up of 211 Swedish patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2013;38:377–87.
207. Brandse JF, van den Brink GR, Wildenberg ME, et al. Loss of inﬂiximab
into feces is associated with lack of response to therapy in patients with
severe ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2015;149:350–5.e2.
208. Choi CH, Rutter MD, Askari A, et al. Forty-year analysis of colonoscopic
surveillance program for neoplasia in ulcerative colitis: An updated
overview. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110:1022–34.
209. Ogata H, Kato J, Hirai F, et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
oral tacrolimus (FK506) in the management of hospitalized patients
with steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2012;18:
803–8.
210. Ogata H, Matsui T, Nakamura M, et al. A randomised dose ﬁnding study
of oral tacrolimus (FK506) therapy in refractory ulcerative colitis. Gut
2006;55:1255–62.
211. Bousvaros A, Kirschner BS, Werlin SL, et al. Oral tacrolimus treatment
of severe colitis in children. J Pediatr 2000;137:794–9.
212. Laharie D, Bourreille A, Branche J, et al. Ciclosporin versus inﬂiximab in
patients with severe ulcerative colitis refractory to intravenous steroids:
A parallel, open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;380:
1909–15.
213. Seagrove AC, Alam MF, Alrubaiy L, et al. Randomised controlled trial.
Comparison Of iNﬂiximab and ciclosporin in STeroid Resistant
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
411
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
UlcerativeColitis:Trial design andprotocol(CONSTRUCT).BMJ Open
2014;4:e005091.
214. Laharie D, Bourreille A, Branche J, et al. Long-term outcome of patients
with steroid-refractory acute severe UC treated with ciclosporin or
inﬂiximab. Gut 2018;67:237–43.
215. Williams JG, Alam MF, Alrubaiy L, et al. Inﬂiximab versus ciclosporin
for steroid-resistant acute severe ulcerative colitis (CONSTRUCT): A
mixed methods, open-label, pragmatic randomised trial. Lancet
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;1:15–24.
216. Ord´as I, Dom`enech E, Mañosa M, et al. Long-term eﬃcacy and safety of
cyclosporine in a cohort of steroid-refractory acute severe ulcerative
colitis patients from the ENEIDA registry (1989-2013): A nationwide
multicenter study. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:1709–18.
217. Leblanc S, Allez M, Seksik P, et al. Successive treatment with
cyclosporine and inﬂiximab in steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106:771–7.
218. Chaparro M, Burgueno P, Iglesias E, et al. Inﬂiximab salvage therapy
after failure of ciclosporin in corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis:
A multicentre study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2012;35:275–83.
219. Gallo G, Kotze PG, Spinelli A. Surgery in ulcerative colitis: When? How?
Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2018;32–33:71–8.
220. Randall J, Singh B, Warren BF, et al. Delayed surgery for acute severe
colitis is associated with increased risk of postoperative complications.
Br J Surg 2010;97:404–9.
221. Leeds IL, Truta B, Parian AM, et al. Early surgical intervention for acute
ulcerative colitis is associated with improved postoperative outcomes. J
Gastrointest Surg 2017;21:1675–82.
222. Peyrin-Biroulet L, Germain A, Patel AS, et al. Systematic review:
Outcomes and post-operative complications following colectomy for
ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;44:807–16.
223. Aberra FN, Lewis JD, Hass D, et al. Corticosteroids and
immunomodulators: Postoperative infectious complication risk in
inﬂammatory bowel disease patients. Gastroenterology 2003;125:320–7.
224. Billioud V, Ford AC, Tedesco ED, et al. Preoperative use of anti-TNF
therapy and postoperative complications in inﬂammatory bowel
diseases: A meta-analysis. J Crohns Colitis 2013;7:853–67.
225. Lau C, Dubinsky M, Melmed G, et al. The impact of preoperative serum
anti-TNFa therapy levels on early postoperative outcomes in
inﬂammatory bowel disease surgery. Ann Surg 2015;261:487–96.
226. FerranteM, de Buckvan Overstraeten A,Schils N, etal.Perioperativeuse
of vedolizumab is not associated with postoperative infectious
complications in patients with ulcerative colitis undergoing colectomy. J
Crohns Colitis 2017;11:1353–61.
227. Hartman C, Eliakim R, Shamir R. Nutritional status and nutritional
therapy in inﬂammatory bowel diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2009;15:
2570–8.
228. Lochs H, Dejong C, Hammarqvist F, et al. ESPEN guidelines on enteral
nutrition: Gastroenterology. Clin Nutr 2006;25:260–74.
229. Krugliak Cleveland N, Kinnucan JA, Rubin DT. Prevention of colorectal
cancer in inﬂammatory bowel disease using advanced technologies. In
Cohen RD (ed). Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease: Diagnosis and
Therapeutics. Springer: New York, NY, 2017, pp 101–19.
230. Lutgens MW, van Oijen MG, van der Heijden GJ, et al. Declining risk of
colorectal cancer in inﬂammatory bowel disease: An updated meta-
analysis of population-based cohort studies. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2013;
19:789–99.
231. Mahmoud R, Shah SC, Ten Hove JR, et al. No association between
pseudopolyps and colorectal neoplasia in patients with inﬂammatory
bowel disease. Gastroenterology. [Epub ahead of print December 7,
2018.]
232. Choi CH, Ignjatovic-Wilson A, Askari A, et al. Low-grade dysplasia in
ulcerative colitis: Risk factors for developing high-grade dysplasia or
colorectal cancer. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110:1461–71; quiz 1472.
233. Ananthakrishnan AN, Cagan A, Cai T, et al. Colonoscopy is associated
with a reduced risk for colon cancer and mortality in patients with
inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:
322–9.e1.
234. Collins PD, Mpofu C, Watson AJ, et al. Strategies for detecting colon
cancer and/or dysplasia in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006:CD000279.
235. Lutgens MW, Vleggaar FP, Schipper ME, et al. High frequency of early
colorectal cancer in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gut 2008;57:1246–51.
236. Shah SC, Ten Hove JR, Castaneda D, et al. High risk of advanced
colorectal neoplasia in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis
associated with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2018;16:1106–13.e3.
237. Krugliak Cleveland N, Rubin DT, Hart J, et al. Patients with ulcerative
colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis frequently have subclinical
inﬂammation in the proximal colon. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;
16:68–74.
238. Choi CR, Al Bakir I, Ding NJ, et al. Cumulative burden of inﬂammation
predicts colorectal neoplasia risk in ulcerative colitis: A large single-
centre study. Gut. [Epub ahead of print November 17, 2017.]
239. Rubin DT. Why it’s time for updated U.S. colorectal cancer prevention
guidelines in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gastrointest Endosc 2014;80:
849–51.
240. Rubin DT, Rothe JA, Hetzel JT, et al. Are dysplasia and colorectal cancer
endoscopically visible in patients with ulcerative colitis? Gastrointest
Endosc 2007;65:998–1004.
241. Rutter MD, Saunders BP, Wilkinson KH, et al. Most dysplasia in ulcerative
colitis is visible at colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 2004;60:334–9.
242. Bessissow T, Dulai PS, Restellini S, et al. Comparison of endoscopic
dysplasia detection techniques in patients with ulcerative colitis: A
systematic review and network meta-analysis. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2018;
24:2518–26.
243. Laine L, Kaltenbach T, Barkun A, et al. SCENIC international consensus
statement on surveillance and management of dysplasia in
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology 2015;148:639–51.e28.
244. Gallinger ZR, Rumman A, Murthy SK, et al. Perspectives on
endoscopic surveillance of dysplasia in inﬂammatory bowel disease:
A survey of academic gastroenterologists. Endosc Int Open 2017;5:
E974–9.
245. Watanabe T, Ajioka Y, Mitsuyama K, et al. Comparison of targeted vs
random biopsies for surveillance of ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 2016;151:1122–30.
246. Moussata D, Allez M, Cazals-Hatem D, et al. Are random biopsies still
useful for the detection of neoplasia in patients with IBD undergoing
surveillance colonoscopy with chromoendoscopy? Gut 2018;67:616–24.
247. Mooiweer E, van der Meulen-de Jong AE, Ponsioen CY, et al.
Chromoendoscopy for surveillance in inﬂammatory bowel disease does
not increase neoplasia detection compared with conventional
colonoscopy with random biopsies: Results from a large retrospective
study. Am J Gastroenterol 2015;110:1014–21.
248. Dekker E, van den Broek FJ, Reitsma JB, et al. Narrow-band imaging
compared with conventional colonoscopy for the detection of dysplasia in
patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis. Endoscopy 2007;39:216–21.
249. Ignjatovic A, East JE, Subramanian V, et al. Narrow band imaging for
detection of dysplasia in colitis: A randomized controlled trial. Am J
Gastroenterol 2012;107:885–90.
250. van den Broek FJ, Fockens P, van Eeden S, et al. Narrow-band imaging
versus high-deﬁnition endoscopy for the diagnosis of neoplasia in
ulcerative colitis. Endoscopy 2011;43:108–15.
251. Bisschops R, Bessissow T, Joseph JA, et al. Chromoendoscopy versus
narrow band imaging in UC: A prospective randomised controlled trial.
Gut 2018;67:1087–94.
252. Deepak P, Hanson GJ, Fletcher JG, et al. Incremental diagnostic yield of
chromoendoscopy and outcomes in inﬂammatory bowel disease
patients with a history of colorectal dysplasia on white-light endoscopy.
Gastrointest Endosc 2016;83:1005–12.
253. Rubin DT, Krugliak Cleveland N, Rodriquez DM. Outcomes of colitis-
associated dysplasia after referral from the community to a tertiary
center. Gastrointest Endosc 2016;84:1078–9.
254. Carballal S, Maisterra S, Lopez-Serrano A, et al. Real-life
chromoendoscopy for neoplasia detection and characterisation in long-
standing IBD. Gut 2018;67:70–8.
255. MarionJF, WayeJD,IsraelY,etal.Chromoendoscopyismoreeﬀective than
standard colonoscopy in detecting dysplasia during long-term surveillance
of patients with colitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:713–9.
256. Ten Hove JR, Shah SC, Shaﬀer SR, et al. Consecutive negative ﬁndings on
colonoscopy during surveillance predict a low risk of advanced neoplasia
in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease with long-standing colitis:
Results of a 15-year multicentre, multinational cohort study. Gut. [Epub
ahead of print May 2, 2018.]
257. Odze R. Diagnostic problems and advances in inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Mod Pathol 2003;16:347–58.
258. Odze RD, Tomaszewski JE, Furth EE, et al. Variability in the diagnosis of
dysplasia in ulcerative colitis by dynamic telepathology. Oncol Rep 2006;
16:1123–9.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 114 | MARCH 2019
www.amjgastro.com
Rubin et al.
412
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
259. Farraye FA, Odze RD, Eaden J, et al. AGA medical position statement on
the diagnosis and management of colorectal neoplasia in inﬂammatory
bowel disease. Gastroenterology 2010;138:738–45.
260. Al-Sukhni W, McLeod RS, MacRae H, et al. Oncologic outcome in
patients with ulcerative colitis associated with dyplasia or cancer who
underwent stapled or handsewn ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. Dis
Colon Rectum 2010;53:1495–500.
261. Chambers WM, McC Mortensen NJ. Should ileal pouch-anal
anastomosis include mucosectomy? Colorectal Dis 2007;9:384–92.
262. Wanders LK, Dekker E, Pullens B, et al. Cancer risk after resection of
polypoid dysplasia in patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis: A
meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;12:756–64.
263. Politis DS, Katsanos KH, Tsianos EV, et al. Pseudopolyps in
inﬂammatory bowel diseases: Have we learned enough? World J
Gastroenterol 2017;23:1541–51.
264. Krugliak Cleveland N, Huo D, Sadiq F, et al. Assessment of peri-polyp
biopsy specimens of ﬂat mucosa in patients with inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Gastrointest Endosc 2018;87:1304–9.
265. LahiﬀC, Mun Wang L, Travis SPL, et al. Diagnostic yield of dysplasia in
polyp-adjacent biopsies for patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease: A
cross-sectional study. J Crohns Colitis 2018;12:670–6.
266. Ten Hove JR, Mooiweer E, Dekker E, et al. Low rate of dysplasia
detection in mucosa surrounding dysplastic lesions in patients
undergoing surveillance for inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:222–8.e2.
267. KrugliakClevelandN, Ollech JE,ColmanRJ, etal. Eﬃcacy and follow-up
of segmental or subtotal colectomy in patients with colitis-associated
neoplasia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:205–6.
268. Qiu X, Ma J, Wang K, et al. Chemopreventive eﬀects of 5-aminosalicylic
acid on inﬂammatory bowel disease-associated colorectal cancer and
dysplasia: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Oncotarget 2017;8:
1031–45.
269. Zhu Z, Mei Z, Guo Y, et al. Reduced risk of inﬂammatory bowel
disease-associated colorectal neoplasia with use of thiopurines: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Crohns Colitis 2018;12:
546–58.
© 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
UC in Adults
413
Copyright © 2019 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
