Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKbH4TTImqenVDZHALwmCBBpU87jZOsD+GlfyAayo1Vw8uP2RGAu3ZRM on 02/05/2020
ACG Clinical Guideline: Small Intestinal
Bacterial Overgrowth
Mark Pimentel, MD, FRCP(C), FACG1, Richard J. Saad, MD, FACG2, Millie D. Long, MD, MPH, FACG (GRADE Methodologist)3 and
Satish S. C. Rao, MD, PhD, FRCP, FACG4
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is defined as the presence of excessive numbers of bacteria in the small bowel,
causing gastrointestinal symptoms. This guideline statement evaluates criteria for diagnosis, defines the optimal
methods for diagnostic testing, and summarizes treatment options for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. This
guideline provides an evidence-based evaluation of the literature through the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) process. In instances where the available evidence was not appropriate for
a formal GRADE recommendation, key concepts were developed using expert consensus.
Am J Gastroenterol 2020;115:165–178. https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000000501; published online January 8, 2020
INTRODUCTION
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) has been recognized
as a medical phenomenon for many decades. Although its deﬁni-
tion has been debated, the principle concept is that the normal
small bowel has lower levels of microbial colonization compared
with the colon and this normal balance is signiﬁcantly altered in
SIBO. SIBO is deﬁned as the presence of excessive numbers of
bacteriainthesmallbowel causinggastrointestinal(GI)symptoms.
These bacteria are usually coliforms, which are typically found in
the colon and include predominantly Gram-negative aerobic and
anaerobic species that ferment carbohydrates producing gas (1).
Since the late 1990s, there has been a resurgence in SIBO
research which has been further enhanced by the increasing
knowledge of the gut microbiome and its roles in human health
and disease (2). These include a series of articles linking SIBO to
diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (3,4), in-
ﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) (5), systemic sclerosis (6), mo-
tility
disorders
(7,8),
cirrhosis
(9),
fatty
liver
(10),
postgastrectomy syndrome (11), and a variety of other con-
ditions. Although these ﬁndings are important, a recent con-
sensus document
identiﬁed a number
of strengths and
weaknesses in the published work in this area (12). As such, an
eﬀort has been underway to re-evaluate the criteria for the di-
agnosis of SIBO and deﬁne the optimal methods for diagnostic
testing to identify this condition. Furthermore, treatment for
SIBO has been largely empirical, has not undergone the scrutiny
of sponsored clinical trials, and requires appraisal. In this
guideline, we provide an evidence-based evaluation of the liter-
ature and assess the current unmet needs in SIBO research.
The guideline is structured in sections, each with recom-
mendations, key concepts, and summaries of the evidence. Each
recommendation statement has an associated assessment of the
quality of evidence and strength of recommendation based on the
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation (GRADE) process. The GRADE system was used to
evaluate the quality of supporting evidence (13). A “strong”
recommendation is made when the beneﬁts clearly outweigh the
negatives and/or the result of no action. “Conditional” is used
when some uncertainty remains about the balance of beneﬁts and
potential harms. The quality of the evidence is graded from high
to low. “High” quality evidence indicates that further research is
unlikely to change the authors’ conﬁdence in the estimate of
eﬀect, and that we are very conﬁdent that the true eﬀect lies close
to that of the estimate of the eﬀect. “Moderate” quality evidence is
associated with moderate conﬁdence in the eﬀect estimate, al-
though further research would be likely to have an impact on the
conﬁdence of the estimate, whereas “low” quality evidence indi-
cates that further study would likely have an important impact on
the conﬁdence in the estimate of the eﬀect and would likely
change the estimate. “Very low” quality evidence indicates very
little conﬁdence in the eﬀect estimate, and that the true eﬀect is
likely to be substantially diﬀerent than the estimate of eﬀect.
Key concepts are statements that are not amenable to the
GRADE process either because of the structure of the statement
or because of the available evidence. In some instances, key
concepts are based on extrapolation of evidence and/or expert
opinion. Tables 1 and2 summarize the recommendations andkey
concepts, respectively, in this guideline.
DEFINITION OF SIBO
SIBO can be most inclusively deﬁned as a clinical syndrome of GI
symptoms caused by the presence of excessive numbers of bac-
teria within the small intestine (potential thresholds are discussed
below). This deﬁnition implies that there must be a measurable
and excessive bacterial burden within the small bowel, and that
this microbial overgrowth has resulted in speciﬁc GI signs and/or
1Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA; 2Michigan Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; 3Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA; 4Division of
Gastroenterology/Hepatology, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia, USA. Correspondence: Mark Pimentel, MD, FRCP(C), FACG. E-mail: pimentelm@cshs.org.
Received February 13, 2019; accepted November 12, 2019
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
165
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
symptoms. For example, the pathologic fermentation of nutrients
that would ordinarily be completely absorbed in the small in-
testine could lead to the production of excess gas and bloating.
The objective measurement of bacteria in the small intestine
was initially achieved through quantitative culture of aspirates
acquired from the proximal small bowel, akin to urine culture for
urinary tract infection (14). However, the threshold cutoﬀfor the
deﬁnition of a positive culture has been controversial, both in the
published literature and among experts in the ﬁeld. The most
recent North American Consensus found that the literature
points more accurately to a bacterial colony count of $103
colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) in a duodenal/
jejunal aspirate as diagnostic of SIBO (12). This is based on
a collation of the literature among normal subjects in trials. It
should be noted that the bacterial colony counts in SIBO are based
on growth of culturable bacteria.
An alternative method for the diagnosis of SIBO is the mea-
surement of exhaled hydrogen gas on the breath, after the in-
gestion of a ﬁxed quantity of a carbohydrate substrate such as
glucose or lactulose (15,16). Although popular, it is an indirect
method of assessing whether there are excessive amounts of
bacteria in the small bowel. Similar to the quantitative culture of
small bowel aspirates, the published literature and expert opinion
has varied widely regarding both the details of breath testing
techniques and the deﬁnition of a positive test for SIBO. With
these limitations in mind, the most recent published criteria on
breath testing recommend a rise in exhaled hydrogen of at least 20
parts per million (ppm) above baseline within 90 minutes of oral
ingestion of either 75 g of glucose or 10 g of lactulose, as diagnostic
of SIBO (12).
The signs and/or symptoms of SIBO can arise from the mal-
absorption of nutrients, alteration in intestinal permeability, in-
ﬂammation, and/or immune activation that arises from the
pathologic bacterial fermentation within the small bowel (17).
Such symptoms can include, but may not be limited to, nausea,
bloating, ﬂatulence, abdominal distension, abdominal cramping,
abdominal pain, diarrhea, and/or constipation. In extreme cases,
signs can include steatorrhea, weight loss, anemia, deﬁciencies in
fat soluble vitamins, and/or mucosal inﬂammation of the small
bowel. These are usually associated with extraordinary causes of
SIBO such as iatrogenic (postsurgical blind loop) or sclero-
derma (18).
Evidence suggests that abdominal pain, bloating, gas, disten-
sion, ﬂatulence, and diarrhea are the most common symptoms
described in patients with SIBO and prevalent in more than two-
thirds of patients (19–21). In severe cases, nutritional deﬁciencies
including vitamin B12, vitamin D, and iron deﬁciencies can oc-
cur, but in most cases, these are subtle or undetectable (22). Some
patients may also manifest fatigue and poor concentration (23).
However, no single symptom can be speciﬁcally attributed to
SIBO. Symptoms often masquerade as other diagnoses such as
IBS, functional diarrhea, functional dyspepsia, or bloating. This is
due in part to the varied presentation of patients with SIBO and
the number of underlying risk factors that can lead to the de-
velopment of SIBO. For example, in a patient with chronic pan-
creatitis, it is diﬃcult to determine whether diarrhea results from
exocrine insuﬃciency or from coexistent SIBO and to what extent
symptoms are related to pancreatic insuﬃciency vs SIBO. Simi-
larly, in patients with Crohn’s disease, particularly those having
undergone ileocecal valve resection, symptoms of abdominal
pain, boating, and diarrhea could result from SIBO vs that of
active inﬂammation, bile acid malabsorption, or postoperative
strictures. Indeed, several studies have attempted to assess this in
a systematic manner. For example, Jacobs et al. (21) obtained
aerobic and anerobic duodenal cultures from subjects undergoing
antroduodenal manometry and compared 38 subjects with
culture-positive SIBO to 74 subjects with culture-negative SIBO
and reported no diﬀerences in the intensity, frequency, and du-
ration of abdominal pain or in bloating, fullness, belching, in-
digestion, nausea, vomiting diarrhea, and gas. Therefore, close
attention should be paid not only to a patient’s symptom proﬁle
but also to risk factors for SIBO and any history of previous
attempts to treat other underlying conditions, when evaluating
SIBO as a possible diagnosis in a patient presenting with un-
explained abdominal pain, gas, bloating, diarrhea, and/or mal-
absorptive symptoms.
Table 1. Summary and strength of GRADED recommendations for SIBO
Diagnosis of SIBO
1. We suggest the use of breath testing (glucose hydrogen or lactulose hydrogen) for the diagnosis of SIBO in patients with IBS (conditional recommendation,
very low level of evidence).
2. We suggest using glucose hydrogen or lactulose hydrogen breath tests for the diagnosis of SIBO in symptomatic patients with suspected motility disorders
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
3. We suggest testing for SIBO using glucose hydrogen or lactulose hydrogen breath tests in symptomatic patients (abdominal pain, gas, bloating, and/or
diarrhea) with previous luminal abdominal surgery (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
Other conditions associated with SIBO
4. We suggest against the use of breath testing for the diagnosis of SIBO in asymptomatic patients on PPIs (conditional recommendation, very low level of
evidence).
5. We suggest testing for methane using glucose or lactulose breath tests to diagnose the overgrowth of methane-producing organisms (IMO) in symptomatic
patients with constipation (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
Treatment of SIBO
6. We suggest the use of antibiotics in symptomatic patients with SIBO to eradicate overgrowth and resolve symptoms (conditional recommendation, low level of
evidence).
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IMO, intestinal methanogen overgrowth; PPI, proton-pump inhibitor; SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
166
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
DIAGNOSIS OF SIBO
Breath testing
Quantitative measurement of breath hydrogen and/or methane is
a relatively inexpensive, noninvasive, easy, and widely available
test. Since theclinical deﬁnition ofSIBO isunclear inthe absence of
validated patient-reported outcomes (PROs), the use of breath
testing for SIBO is recognized as a key concept in Table 2 but not
a GRADEable guideline. Newer mail-in kits are available for home
testing for patients not able to travel or in remote locations. Often
these kits are directed to laboratories with Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments certiﬁcation and as such have more
stringent validation/calibration supervision as compared to clini-
cians oﬃces. However, diet precautions before test, substrate in-
gestion, and breath test collection occur in a home setting that may
not be strictly controlled.
The premise of breath tests is that human cells are incapable of
producing hydrogen and methane gases (24). Consequently, if
these gases can be detected in breath samples, it must signify
another source such as the fermentation of carbohydrates by
microbes in the gut, their subsequent absorption into the blood
stream, and their expiration through the lungs (25). This prin-
ciple has led to the development of several carbohydrate
substrate-based breath tests. Here, after ingestion of a carbohy-
drate load and its exposure to bacteria, the sugar is rapidly fer-
mented to produce hydrogen gas along with short-chain fatty
acids. Methanogenic archaea in turn use hydrogen as a substrate
for the production of methane (26,27). A rise in the concen-
trations of hydrogen in breath samples facilitates a diagnosis of
SIBO, whereas the North American Consensus recommended
that the presence of methane levels $10 ppm is diagnostic of
methanogenic overgrowth (Figure 1a–c) (12). However, some
experts recommend a rise of 10 ppm in methane levels, and this
requires conﬁrmation. The carbohydrates traditionally used as
substrates in breath testing for SIBO are glucose and lactulose,
with each substrate possessing unique characteristics. Histori-
cally, breath testing was performed using a radiolabeled substrate
(e.g., xylose), which could be detected on exhaled breath samples,
if excess bacteria were present (28). However, this technique is no
longer used because of safety concerns regarding radiolabeled
substrates (14).
A recent North American Consensus article provides some
guidelines for standardized methods of performing and inter-
preting breath test results (12). Before breath testing, it is rec-
ommended that patients avoid use of antibiotics for 4 weeks and
avoid promotility agents and laxatives for at least 1 week. The day
before the breath test, fermentable foods (e.g., complex carbo-
hydrates) should be avoided, and patients should fast for 8–12
hours. In addition, during the breath test, patients should avoid
smoking and minimize physical exertion. The North American
Consensus recommends administering 75-g glucose or 10-g
lactulose, either taken with or followed by 1 cup of water (;250
mL). The breath samples should be measured for hydrogen and
methane. As noted previously, an increase in hydrogen concen-
trations of $20 ppm from baseline within 90 (12)–120 (29)
minutes is recommended to be diagnostic of SIBO (Figure 1a).
Although methane is increasingly important and recognized,
it creates a nomenclature problem in the SIBO framework. For
methane, a concentration of $10 ppm at any point during the test
is indicative of methanogen colonization. However, methanogens
are not “bacteria” (representing the “B” in SIBO) but belong to the
domain Archaea and may also overgrow in the colon and not just
the small intestine. As such, we have proposed a new term, in-
testinal methanogen overgrowth (IMO), for methanogens rather
than SIBO (Figure 1b).
Table 2. Summary of key concepts in SIBO
1. The most common symptom of SIBO is bloating.
2. Vitamin deficiencies in SIBO are not common and are usually seen in patients with an iatrogenic or structural abnormality of the bowel such as blind loop
syndrome. Note: Folate may be elevated in SIBO as bacteria produce folate.
3. The cause(s) of SIBO in patients are varied, and this may need to be determined in order to best prevent a recurrence of SIBO (see Table 3).
4. Breath testing is useful for identifying SIBO noninvasively before antibiotic treatment.
5. During breath testing, it is important to use the correct dose of glucose (75 g) and lactulose (10 g) for standardization purposes.
6. Based on an evidence-based approach from the literature, a colony count of $103 CFU/mL is most suggestive of SIBO when using duodenal culture.
7. The presence of excessive methane on breath testing does not indicate SIBO, since methanogens are not bacteria (they are archaea). A better term
would be IMO.
8. Methanobrevibacter smithii appears to be the key methanogen responsible for breath methane production.
9. Constipation is associated with elevated levels of breath methane and stool M. smithii.
10. Targeting methanogens may reduce methane production and improve constipation.
11. A proportion of subjects with IBS are found to have SIBO, based both on breath testing and on culture.
12. There is a lack of consistent data to support recommending specific probiotics in the treatment of SIBO.
13. There is currently no basis for the use of fecal microbiota transplant in the treatment of SIBO.
14. A focus on prevention of SIBO is important to avoid the need for repeated courses of antibiotics. Treatment of the underlying cause represents the primary mode
of prevention.
15. In subjects with an abnormal breath test, retesting after treatment may correlate with symptom improvement and may be confirmed by normalization of
hydrogen or methane levels.
CFU/mL, colony-forming units per milliliter; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IMO, intestinal methanogen overgrowth; SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
167
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Figure 1. Breath test examples. (a) Hydrogen-positive breath test to suggest small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. (b) Methane-positive breath test to
suggest intestinal methanogen overgrowth. (c) Normal breath test. ppm, parts per million.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
168
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Irrespective of the nomenclature, a change in or measured
level of hydrogen or methane that remains below the threshold
levels noted above should be considered a negative test
(Figure 1c). When using lactulose as a substrate, an initial peak
from bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine followed by
a second peak from colonic bacterial fermentation has been de-
scribed. However, per the new consensus statement, a second
peak is not required, but the ﬁrst peak must occur within 90
minutes of substrate administration for the test to be considered
positive. According to a systematic review by Khoshini et al. (14),
the sensitivity of lactulose has ranged from 31% to 68% and
speciﬁcity has ranged from 44% to 100%, whereas the sensitivity
of glucose breath testing has varied from 20% to 93% and speci-
ﬁcity from 30% to 86% when compared with cultures of aspirates
from the small bowel. Recently, the use of fructose as a mono-
saccharide substrate for persons with diabetes with suspected
SIBO has been evaluated because a 75-g glucose load can cause
acute hyperglycemia and gut dysmotility and possibly impact the
breath test results. In this study, when compared with duodenal
aspirates, the use of a fructose solution as the substrate in persons
with diabetes yielded similar sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and di-
agnostic accuracy (48%, 71%, and 58%, respectively) for the di-
agnosis of SIBO when compared with glucose solution in persons
without diabetes (30). Although not studied, lactulose may be
preferred for diabetic subjects as a nonabsorbed carbohydrate. In
addition to hydrogen and methane, hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) is
another gas produced by gut bacteria, but a commercial testing
system is not yet available. A recent study evaluated the role of
H2S in patients undergoing a workup for SIBO (31). However,
a cutoﬀvalue for diagnosis of SIBO using H2S gas needs to be
validated and its utility determined.
Small bowel aspiration and culture
Small bowel aspirate and culture is often considered the gold
standard for the diagnosis of SIBO. Standardized techniques for
aseptic collection of small bowel aspirate samples are lacking, as
methods diﬀer regarding the placement of the device for sample
aspiration and the amount of ﬂuid collected, as well as sample
handling and subsequent culture. In general, during an upper
endoscopy, a deep duodenal intubation can be achieved while
minimizing suction during the insertion of the scope through
mouth and stomach and preventing cross-contamination of
secretions from outside the duodenum as described (20,21). In
1 technique, a 2-mm Liguory catheter (COOK Medical, Bloo-
mington, IN) with multiple side holes is passed through the
biopsy channel of an upper endoscope into the third and fourth
portions of the duodenum. Using gentle suction, approximately
3–5 mL of duodenal ﬂuid is aspirated, and the specimen is sent
to a microbiology laboratory for aerobic/anaerobic culture
(20,21). Wearing of sterile gloves both by the endoscopist and
assistant when assembling the catheter and collecting samples
and placing a sterile cap on the syringe are all key components
for proper specimen collection and handling. Once obtained,
the specimen should be promptly transferred to a microbiology
laboratory with rapid processing for aerobic and anaerobic
cultures. It is important to communicate with the laboratory
personnel regarding use of appropriate media and not to report
results as positive or negative but to describe the growth of
organisms as a precise colony count in CFU/mL. Historically,
a level of $105 CFU/mL had been used for identifying patho-
logical bacterial infection in humans, including a diagnosis of
SIBO. However, in the case of SIBO, this cutoﬀappears too
stringent and lacks validation (25,32). Healthy controls have
,103 CFU/mL in the small bowel, and concentrations above
105 CFU are almost exclusively seen in patients with gastrec-
tomy (14). These levels were often from patients with Billroth I
or II and blind loops or segments of intestinal stasis out of
continuity with the digestive ﬂow. Therefore, a concentration of
$103 CFU/mL is now generally considered diagnostic of SIBO
and has been recommended by the North American Consensus
(12). Diagnosis of SIBO using small bowel aspiration and cul-
ture is time-consuming, expensive, and is an invasive pro-
cedure which requires sedation and carries the usual risks of
endoscopy, but is technically simple and can be widely per-
formed outside of specialized referral centers or research en-
vironment. In 1 study (20), the diagnostic agreement of small
bowel aspirates with breath testing was ;65%, indicating that
using 1 testing method may not deﬁnitively diagnose SIBO
and that additional testing may be necessary, particularly in
patients with persistent symptoms and a high likelihood of
SIBO.
Although published data are limited, there is a growing list of
studies assessing SIBO by 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene se-
quencing in a cohort of subjects with IBS (33). In this study,
sequencing of a small cohort of subjects revealed lower microbial
diversity in the duodenum in subjects with IBS compared with
subjects without IBS. The most signiﬁcant ﬁndings were increases
in Escherichia/Shigella (P 5 0.005) and Aeromonas (P 5 0.051)
and decreases in Acinetobacter (P 5 0.024), Citrobacter (P 5
0.031), and Microvirgula (P 5 0.036). In another study, Ker-
ckhoﬀs et al. found higher levels of Pseudomonas in the small
bowel of subjects with IBS compared with healthy controls (34).
These results were mirrored in stool samples from the same co-
hort. In the largest study to date, sequencing was able to validate
SIBO as .103 CFU/mL by culture on MacConkey agar based on
correlation to symptoms, sequencing, and breath testing results
(35). In the same study, using a cutoﬀof .103 CFU/mL also
correlated with a positive hydrogen breath test (i.e., a rise in
hydrogen $20 ppm above baseline) at 90 minutes and also cor-
related with the clinical symptoms of bloating and urgency (35).
Another study sequenced microbes in duodenal samples and
rectal biopsies from subjects with IBS and controls (36) and also
found higher numbers of bacteria in the small bowel in subjects
with IBS. However, a study of jejunal aspirates using culture and
PCR of 16S rRNA genes found no signiﬁcant correlation between
glucose breath test results and bacterial levels (37). Large-scale
studies are currently underway to evaluate this further.
Newer techniques
It is recognized that the current breath tests have low sensitivity
and speciﬁcity and that additional validation studies are needed
for standardization (38). The lactulose breath test has been crit-
icized for high false-positive values (because of the accelerated
transit and colonic fermentation in some individuals) and the
glucose breath test for being absorbed in proximal duodenum and
therefore having low sensitivity for detecting distal SIBO—in
other words, missing overgrowth in distal small bowel (12,14,39).
A unique orally ingested capsule technology is also under-
development that can measure in vivo hydrogen and carbon di-
oxide after ingestion of a carbohydrate meal and may provide
a better alternative to current breath hydrogen measurement
techniques (40). Additional capsule technologies that can sample
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
169
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
small bowel bacteria (small bowel capsule detection system) are
also emerging, and these technologies could provide a more direct
and accurate evaluation of SIBO (41).
Recommendations
IBS is one of the most commonly evaluated condition with ties to
SIBO, which has allowed this association to be graded in this
guideline.AlthoughtherateofSIBOinIBSisdebated,meta-analyses
suggest that up to 78% of IBS subjects suﬀer from SIBO (42). Al-
thoughthereremainsaquestionofcauseoreﬀectinIBS,thereislittle
controversy that a subset of subjects with IBS have SIBO. This evi-
dence is now based on meta-analysis, and other evidence such as 16S
rRNA gene sequencing continues to support this concept (33,34,36).
Further evidence that IBS is associated with microbiome
dysbiosis (or SIBO) is based on the successful use of antibiotics in
the treatment of IBS. Although this will be discussed in more
detail below, in 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved a nonabsorbed antibiotic, rifaximin, for the
treatment of IBS with diarrhea based on the existing un-
derstanding that one possible underlying cause of IBS is pertur-
bation of the microbiome. A subset of subjects with IBS who
participated in the TARGET 3 trial that supported approval of
rifaximin (43) also underwent breath testing. Recently presented
data suggested that the optimal beneﬁt of rifaximin was seen in
subjects with IBS with abnormal baseline hydrogen levels during
the lactulose breath test (44). In fact, 76% of subjects with an
initial positive breath test that became negative following a course
of antibiotics were deﬁned as a responder, based on the primary
FDA outcome measure. This further supports that altered mi-
crobial levels could play a role in IBS.
Recommendations
OTHER CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SIBO
Thereareanumberofmechanismsresponsibleformaintainingthe
relatively sterile milieu of the small intestine (Table 3). Deﬁciency
orbreakdown in one ormoreofthese mechanisms can resultin the
abnormal accumulation of bacteria in the small bowel. As such, in
almost all instances, SIBO is an epiphenomenon related to some-
thing else, usually a condition that leads to stasis in the small
intestine. Table 4 provides a list of conditions that have historically
been linked to SIBO, which include small bowel mechanical
problems or motility disorders. However, conditions such as
malabsorption, altered immunity, postgastric and colon surgeries,
and systemic disorders can also be important. SIBO is not only
associated with several conditions (Table 4) but can also cause
malabsorption, vitamin deﬁciencies, and other problems. These
data are based on animal and human studies, and in some cases,
reversibility has been demonstrated after successful treatment of
SIBO, supporting a cause-and-eﬀect relationship.
The small bowel has an inherent cleansing function with re-
curring antegrade peristalsis and migratory motor complexes
organized into 3 phases. Of these, the phase III migrating motor
complex (MMC) is an intense phasic and tonic contractile event
that begins in the stomach or proximal bowel and sweeps through
toward the colon, propelling chyme, secretions, and bacteria, and
oﬀering a natural protection against SIBO (7,45). This organized
bioprotective mechanism may be disturbed by motility disorders
including neuropathy or myopathy (examples include sclero-
derma and diabetes) or by medications such as opioids, anti-
diarrheals, or anticholinergics, which can reduce propulsive
movements and facilitate bacterial overgrowth. Likewise, post-
surgical changes such as gastrojejunostomy with a blind loop or
injury to the vagus nerve may each provide an opportunity for
bacterial overgrowth. Although strictures causing partial or ﬁxed
obstruction would be obvious causes of stagnation and have been
considered to be risk factors for SIBO, there are currently no solid
peer-reviewed publications validating this. Colectomy, either
partial or complete, and especially with loss of the ileocecal valve,
will allow retrograde movement of colonic contents resulting in
colonization of the small bowel with bacteria normally found in
the large intestine (46). Studies in patients with anatomical risk
factors from intrinsic causes such as small bowel diverticulosis or
ﬁstula formation or iatrogenic consequences such as post–Roux-
en-Y, ileocolonic anastomosis, or post–radiation stricture/
adhesion formation have all shown a higher prevalence of SIBO
(8,21,32,46–50). Advanced age and female gender are also asso-
ciated with a higher likelihood of SIBO, perhaps because of delays
1. We suggest the use of breath testing (glucose hydrogen or lactulose
hydrogen) for the diagnosis of SIBO in patients with IBS
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
2. We suggest using glucose hydrogen or lactulose hydrogen breath
testing for the diagnosis of SIBO in symptomatic patients with
suspected motility disorders (conditional recommendation, very
low level of evidence).
3. We suggest testing for SIBO using glucose hydrogen or lactulose
hydrogen breath testing in symptomatic patients (abdominal pain,
gas, bloating, and/or diarrhea) with previous luminal abdominal
surgery (conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
Table 3. Mechanisms for maintaining small bowel ecological
homeostasis
Mechanism
Rationale
Gastric acid
Most ingested bacteria in food cannot survive
the acidic stomach.
Pancreatic enzymes
Digestive enzymes in the proximal small bowel
may also digest bacterial products.
Efficient digestion of nutrients leaves less
substrates for bacteria.
Bile acids
As detergents, bile acids can have an effect on
bacterial membranes.
Small bowel motility
Migrating motor complexes and other events
cleanse the small intestine of debris during
fasting.
IC valve
The IC valve protects the small bowel from
retrograde movement of colonic flora into the
small bowel.
Immune system
Mucosal immunity may be important in the
maintenance of a stable microbiota of the
intestinal lumen.
IC, ileocecal.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
170
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
in gut transit (51,52). Other systemic diseases known to alter
motility and which are associated with SIBO include Parkinson
disease, chronic renal failure, amyloidosis, systemic sclerosis,
hypothyroidism, and diabetes mellitus (53–57). Although these
many mechanisms for SIBO development are intuitive, multi-
center randomized controlled trials of diagnosis and treatment of
SIBO in these above-stated conditions are lacking, and thus from
an evidence-based perspective, higher level data are needed here.
Immune function and inflammation
Evidence supports an association between SIBO and various
immunodeﬁciency syndromes, such as immunoglobulin A de-
ﬁciency and common variable immunodeﬁciency (58–61).
Patients with celiac disease (62,63) are also known to have SIBO.
In the case of Crohn’s disease, 16.8% of those in endoscopic re-
mission had SIBO, and the presence of SIBO on breath testing was
associated with ongoing GI complaints (64).
Several other conditions have been associated with SIBO, in-
cluding cirrhosis and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (65),
chronic pancreatitis (66), cystic ﬁbrosis (67), IBS (25), ﬁbro-
myalgia (68), alcoholism (69), and multiple sclerosis (70), but the
potential mechanism(s) underlying these relationships remains
unclear.
Recommendations
Gastric acidity and proton-pump inhibitors
Gastric acidity plays an important role as a gatekeeper
preventing the overgrowth of bacteria in the upper GI tract.
Patients with hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria, secondary to
autoimmune gastritis, or partial or total gastrectomy are at
increased risk of SIBO (11,71,72). PPIs are among the most
common medications used to treat patients suﬀering from
unexplained GI symptoms and are also used to treat gastro-
esophageal reﬂux disease, ulcers, and functional dyspepsia.
Spiegel et al. described an association between PPI use and
SIBO (73), and most studies have shown a higher risk of de-
veloping SIBO in PPI users (21,74–77). For example, a retro-
spective study that included data from 1,263 duodenal
aspirates noted that PPI use was signiﬁcantly more prevalent in
patients with positive duodenal culture results compared with
those with negative cultures (52.6% vs 30.2%) (74). Similarly,
a meta-analysis of 19 studies with more than 7,000 subjects
conﬁrmed an up to 3-fold higher risk of SIBO with PPI use (77).
In a study by Compare et al. (78), 42 patients with nonerosive
esophagitis were given 8 weeks of PPI therapy. All patients had
negative glucose hydrogen breath tests before PPI use. On
follow-up, 26% of the patients tested positive for SIBO on the
breath test, and signiﬁcantly higher rates of bloating, ﬂatu-
lence, abdominal pain, and diarrhea were reported. However,
the association between SIBO and PPI is complex. Although
most studies did not ﬁnd a relationship between the duration of
PPI therapy and SIBO, some have suggested that double-dose
PPI therapy is more likely to be associated with SIBO than
single dose. However, a recent meta-analysis concluded that it
was not possible to determine whether dose, duration, and type
of PPI exposure had an eﬀect on the risk of developing SIBO
because of insuﬃcient data from previous studies and stated
that “more high-quality evidence is still required” (77). In-
terestingly, another study showed that SIBO was independent
of PPI use in patients with IBS, and that a positive methane
breath test was less common in patients on PPI (79). This may
be due to the fact that methanogens require hydrogen for the
production of methane (discussed below), although this
remains to be determined.
Finally, a recent large-scale deep sequencing study was pre-
sented examining the role ofPPI in the development ofalterations
in the small bowel microbiome (80). The study demonstrated that
SIBO was not seen by culture or sequencing and no changes in
microbial diversity were observed. This further supports the lack
of concrete evidence for the development of SIBO because of PPI
therapy.
Recommendations
Methane production and IMO
One aspect of breath testing that has become very intriguing is
the role of methane. Multiple studies and 1 meta-analysis (81–84)
have demonstrated that a positive methane breath test is associated
with constipation (odds ratio 5 3.51, conﬁdence interval [CI] 5
Table 4. Conditions associated with small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth
Category
Specific condition
Mechanical causes
Small bowel tumor
Volvulus
Intussusception
Postsurgical causes
Systemic disease
Diabetes
Scleroderma
Amyloidosis
Motility
IBS
Pseudo-obstruction
Visceral myopathies
Mitochondrial diseases
Medications
Opiates
Potent antisecretory agents
Malabsorptive conditions
Pancreatic insufficiency
Cirrhosis (altered bile acid composition)
Other malabsorptive conditions
Immune-related
Human immunodeficiency virus
Combined variable immunodeficiency
IgA deficiency
Other
Aging (the elderly)
Small bowel diverticulosis
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IgA, immunoglobulin A.
4. We suggest against the use of breath testing for the diagnosis of
SIBO in asymptomatic patients on proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs)
(conditional recommendation, very low level of evidence).
5. We suggest testing for methane using glucose or lactulose breath
tests to diagnose the overgrowth of methane-producing organisms
(IMO) in symptomatic patients with constipation (conditional
recommendation, very low level of evidence).
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
171
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
2.00–6.16), and the level of methane on the breath is proportional
to the degree of constipation (81). The North American Consensus
deﬁnes a positive methane breath test as the presence of methane
levels of $10 ppm during the breath test (12). Methane infusion
into the small intestine has been shown to slow transit in a canine
model (85), suggesting a direct causal relationship between the
overgrowth of methane-producing organisms and constipation.
This is supported by in vitro experiments demonstrating that
methane can augment contractility and delay ileal peristaltic con-
duction velocity (86) through eﬀects on cholinergic neurons (87).
As will be discussed, methane may be important in disease con-
ditions and may also be useful as a predictor of treatment.
Although methane is interesting, it is also a conundrum.
Methane is produced not by bacteria, but by archaea. Archaea are
prokaryotic organisms and represent the third domain in the 3-
domain system of life, distinct from both bacteria and eukaryotes
(88), from which they can be diﬀerentiated through their rRNA and
cell wall characteristics. In humans, excess methane production
(i.e., levels high enough to result in a positive methane breath test)
appears to be caused by Methanobrevibacter smithii, which is the
predominant methanogen in the human gut (89,90). The problem
then becomes one of nomenclature. Excessive methane production
cannot be caused by “bacterial” overgrowth, but is rather due to
archaeal overgrowth, so the term IMO may be more appropriate
than “SIBO” or “methane-SIBO.” Furthermore, although metha-
nogens do occur in the small bowel, individuals with positive
methane breath tests also exhibit increased methanogen levels in
stool, suggesting they may occur throughout the intestinal tract.
Therefore, it may not be altogether correct to use the term “small
intestinal” overgrowth, and as such, IMO may be more accurate.
TREATMENT OF SIBO
Antibiotics
Recommendations
The use of antibiotics has been the cornerstone of therapy for the
treatment of SIBO (Table 5). Indeed, based solely on anecdotal ev-
idence, it has been a longstanding common practice to use empiric
antibiotic therapy in those with risk factors for and a clinical pre-
sentation suggestive of SIBO. As the consequences of antibiotic use
have increased, including the development of resistant bacteria,
adverse reactions, and rise of opportunistic infections such as Clos-
tridioides diﬃcile, a more cautious approach is needed. Before con-
sidering antibiotic therapy, an eﬀort should be made to objectively
diagnose SIBO. In general, the evidence for the use of antibiotics in
SIBO has been limited to small clinical trials of poor to modest
quality. The antibiotics assessed in these clinical trials have included
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, chlortetracycline, ciproﬂoxacin, doxy-
cycline, metronidazole, neomycin, norﬂoxacin, rifaximin, tetracy-
cline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. A meta-analysis was
performed on 32 clinical trials assessing the safety and eﬃcacy of
rifaximin in the treatment of SIBO through March of 2015 (91). The
analysis included 7 randomized clinical trials, 24 cohort studies, and
1 randomized crossover trial comprising a total of 1,331 patients.
Therewasconsiderableheterogeneityamongthetrials,includingthe
method of SIBO diagnosis; dose of rifaximin, which ranged from
600 to 1,600 mg a day; and duration of therapy, which ranged from
5 to 28 days. Only 1 study compared rifaximin with placebo. With
these limitations in mind, the overall success of therapy with an
intention-to-treat was 70.8% (CI 5 61.4–78.2), and adverse reac-
tions occurred in 4.6%. Two subsequent clinical trials have since
been performed which assessed rifaximin eﬃcacy in treating SIBO.
This included a trial of 18 patients with SIBO after surgery for
colorectal cancer, which was diagnosed by the glucose breath test
(92). Each participant received 10 days of rifaximin at a total daily
dose of 1,200 mg, of whom 33% responded based on follow-up
glucose breath testing. The second trial assessed 17 cirrhotic
patients with SIBO diagnosed by the glucose breath test (93).
Subjects received 7 days of rifaximin at 200 mg 3 times daily and
exhibited a 76% response rate based on repeat breath testing (93).
Three clinical trials have assessed ciproﬂoxacin. The ﬁrst of
these compared treatment with 500 mg of ciproﬂoxacin twice
daily for 10 days to treatment with metronidazole 250 mg 3 times
daily, in a cohort of 29 patients with Crohn’s disease and SIBO
(94). The presence of SIBO was conﬁrmed by the glucose breath
test, and response to treatment was determined by the repeat
glucose breath test. All 14 patients treated with ciproﬂoxacin
responded, compared with 13 of 15 (86%) patients treated with
metronidazole (94). In the second trial, 6 patients with non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis were conﬁrmed to have SIBO by the
glucose breath test. These patients were treated with 500-mg
ciproﬂoxacin twice daily for 5 days, after which only 1 remained
positive (95). In the third trial, 10 patients with cystic ﬁbrosis and
SIBO based on the glucose breath test were treated with 35- to 50-
mg ciproﬂoxacin per kg per day, and after an unspeciﬁed duration
of therapy, 9 of 10 patients responded to treatment, as determined
by the repeat breath test (96).
In a single study assessing elderly nursing home residents, 9 of
62 residents tested positive for SIBO by glucose breath testing (97)
Those testing positive received 10 days of doxycycline, 100 mg
a day, for 4 consecutive months. No follow-up breath testing was
performed, but those with an initial positive breath demonstrated
weight gain and increased body mass index at the end of 4 months,
6. We suggest the use of antibiotics in symptomatic patients with SIBO
to eradicate overgrowth and resolve symptoms (conditional
recommendation, low level of evidence).
Table 5. Suggested antibiotics for treatment of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth
Antibiotic
Recommended dose
Efficacy
Nonabsorbable antibiotic
Rifaximin
550 mg t.i.d.
61%–78%
Systemic antibiotic
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
875 mg b.i.d.
_50%
Ciprofloxacin
500 mg b.i.d.
43%–100%
Doxycycline
100 mg q.d. to b.i.d.
a
Metronidazole
250 mg t.i.d.
43%–87%
Neomycin
500 mg b.i.d.
33%–55%
Norfloxacin
400 mg q.d.
30%–100%
Tetracycline
250 mg q.i.d.
_87.5%
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
160 mg/800 mg b.i.d.
_95%
aIn the study, no testing performed to reassess small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth, although all participants had other objective measures of
improvement.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
172
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
whereas those with a negative breath experience a decrease in
weight and body mass index. There has been 1 randomized,
placebo-controlled trial which assessed the eﬃcacy of norﬂoxacin
treatment, 400 mg twice daily for 10 days, in 15 subjects with IBS
and SIBO diagnosed by culture of small bowel aspirates (98). All 4
subjects who consented to retesting for SIBO responded to treat-
ment,butnoneofthe7subjectswhoreceivedplaceboresponded.A
crossover clinical trial compared the eﬀects of 7 days of treatment
with either amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (875 mg twice daily) or
norﬂoxacin (400 mg twice daily) in 10 patients with SIBO di-
agnosed by the glucose breath test (99). Based on the repeat breath
test, the response rate for amoxicillin-clavulanic acid was 50%,
compared with 30% for norﬂoxacin. A single study assessed the
response of 7 days of tetracycline at a total daily dose of 1 g given to
24 adults with jejunal cultures positive for Escherichia coli. After
therapy, 21 of the 24 (87.5%) demonstrated negative jejunal cul-
tures (100). Fianlly, in an open trial of 20 Brazilian children di-
agnosed with SIBO by the lactulose breath test, treatment with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in combination with metronida-
zole was found to result in a response rate of 95% (101).
As SIBO frequently recurs following a course of antibiotic
therapy, it is common practice to retreat with another course of
antibiotics. This practice of antibiotic retreatment is solely based
on anecdotal evidence and expert opinion. As such, there are no
universally accepted treatment approaches to therapy. One
published study assessed the frequency of SIBO recurrence in 80
adults following a course of antibiotic therapy and found re-
currence rates of 12.6% at 3 months, 27.5% at 6 months, and
43.7% at 9 months (102). Although no clinical trials have been
published regarding the use of repeat antibiotic therapy for re-
current SIBO, there is a study which evaluated the use of repeat
antibiotics to treat SIBO and prevent recurrence in 51 patients
with systemic sclerosis who had a signiﬁcant risk of SIBO re-
currence (103). In this study, 7 days of norﬂoxacin 400 mg twice
daily was alternated once monthly with 7 days of metronidazole
250 mg 3 time daily for 3 consecutive months. Both the pres-
ence of SIBO and SIBO resolution was assessed by glucose breath
testing, with 52% of subjects exhibiting eradication of SIBO
and signiﬁcant improvement of intestinal symptoms after treat-
ment (103).
Two studies have assessed the eﬃcacy of neomycin in the
treatment of IMO. We note that both of these studies used
methane levels $3 ppm to deﬁne positivity, not methane levels
$10 ppm as more recently recommended by the North American
Consensus. The ﬁrst was a placebo-controlled trial of 84 IBS
patients with IMO based on lactulose breath testing (104). Ten
days of neomycin dosed at 500 mg twice daily reduced methane
levels on repeat breath testing to below 3 ppm in 20% of patients,
compared with 1% of those receiving placebo. The second study
was a retrospective chart review of 74 patients with IMO, as de-
termined by the lactulose breath test (105). In this study, patients
received either neomycin only (500 mg twice daily), rifaximin
only (400 mg 3 times daily), or both antibiotics, for 10 days.
Reduction of methane to undetectable levels (below 3 ppm) on
repeat breath testing was 33% in subjects treated with neomycin
alone, 28% in subjects treated with rifaximin alone, and 87% in
subjects treated with both antibiotics (105).
Diet
There are a variety of proposed mechanisms by which dietary
manipulation may be beneﬁcial in the treatment of SIBO.
However, the dominant theme in diet manipulation for SIBO is
the reduction of fermentable products. In most cases, this
involves a low ﬁber approach as well as avoidance of alcohol
sugars and other fermentable sweeteners such as sucralose. In
addition, prebiotics such as inulin should also be avoided.
However, the data on using diet for SIBO are principally exten-
sions of the data from IBS. A recent meta-analysis of low FOD-
MAP (Fermentable Oligo-, Di-, Mono-saccharides And Polyols)
and gluten-free diets in IBS noted that there was no good evidence
to support gluten-free approaches and “very low quality evi-
dence” for low FODMAP diets (106).
Despite the conclusions of the meta-analysis, data do support
that a low FODMAP diet is associated with fewer fermentation
products, as assessed by the breath test. In 1 study, daily hydrogen
output was far higher when FODMAPS were ingested (107). A
study by McIntosh et al. that compared the eﬀect of low vs high
FODMAP diets on symptom severity, metabolomic markers, and
the microbiome in subjects with IBSalso found asmall decrease in
hydrogen production in subjects who consumed a low vs a high
FODMAP diet (108).
Probiotics
The concept of using probiotics to treat a condition with excessive
bacteria seems counterintuitive. However, a study in rats suggest
that the eﬀects of probiotics may include prokinetic actions (109).
Perhaps, shifts in bacteria may also be facilitated by this type
of treatment eﬀecting a change in symptoms or gas pattern on
breath testing.
In an uncontrolled study, administration of Biﬁdobacterium
infantis35624 did notappear to aﬀect hydrogenproduction during
breath testing, but rather resulted in an increase in methane, such
that twice the number of subjects met the criteria for positive
methane production ($10 ppm) after treatment as did before
(110). Another study examined the open label use of a proprietary
probiotic cocktail on IBS subjects with or without SIBO. Although
this was a small study with only 5 subjects with IBS/SIBO, these
subjects appeared to have .70% improvement in clinical symp-
toms, compared with 10.6% in IBS subjects without SIBO (111).
A meta-analysis has recently examined the existing trials of
probiotics in SIBO and found that probiotics appeared to reduce
hydrogen production with an odds ratio of 1.61 (CI 5 1.19–2.17),
but the studies were mostly small and of poor quality (112).
However, the associated SIBO-causing conditions were mixed,
and although there may have been some improvement in
symptoms such as abdominal pain, stool frequency was not im-
pacted by probiotic therapy (112). A recent controlled study
showed that probiotics may cause SIBO and D-lactic acidosis
leading to gas and bloating, and that withdrawal of probiotics
combined with a course of antibiotics led to resolution of
symptoms (23).
Fecal microbiota transplant
Although concrete data on the eﬀects of fecal microbiota trans-
plant (FMT) on SIBO are limited, there are some important
anecdotes that warrant discussion. The most important of these is
a recent study in which the investigators screened donor patients
for SIBO based on the lactulose breath test (113), although
a positive breath test did not preclude donation of fecal material.
Interestingly, subjects with C. diﬃcile receiving stool from donors
with a positive lactulose breath test exhibited more GI symptoms
after FMT, although this did not reach statistical signiﬁcance.
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
173
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Even more concerning is that more recently, the FDA has issued
warnings about multidrug resistant organisms passed on to
recipients during FMT (114).
Another interesting case report illustrates another concern
with FMT in the context of SIBO (115). In this case, the authors
describe severe constipation in a subject who underwent FMT for
a C. diﬃcile infection. It was later determined that the recipient
acquired the phenotypes of constipation and a methane-positive
breath test from the FMT donor (115).
GUIDANCE FOR TRIAL DESIGN
Most of the GRADE eligible recommendations described in these
SIBO guidelines have low levels of evidence to support them. This
has to do with the grading criteria, which require large eﬀect sizes
in double-blind clinical trials. These trials ordinarily involve
therapeutics and not diagnostics. However, these guidelines also
demonstrate that SIBO represents a signiﬁcant unmet need—
despite the large population aﬀected by this condition, there are
few treatment options that have undergone the scrutiny of large-
scale randomized trials. Clearly, improved diagnostics and
treatments are needed to help these patients. In this section, we
outline the important path that these tests and treatments would
need to follow to gain use in clinical practice. Table 6 outlines
a proposed guideline on study design and outcomes in SIBO
clinical trials.
Screening
Trials for SIBO will need to follow a path to identify subjects for
inclusion. Although endoscopic culture of the small bowel for
SIBO could be a potential standard for diagnosis, it has not been
established as a gold standard because of limitations of the
technology and access to more distal small bowel and associated
risks. Indirect techniques such as breath testing can be used, but
would require scrutiny in studies to demonstrate the correlation
between parameters on breath testing and speciﬁc symptoms in
SIBO.
Based on the North American Consensus, a positive breath test
should be based on the following parameters until studies guide
the literature in a better direction to include:
· Positive lactulose or glucose breath test for hydrogen (rise
above baseline $20 ppm by 90 minutes)
· Positive lactulose or glucose breath test for methane ($10
ppm at any point during testing)
It is important to recognize the limitations of breath testing,
and therefore, in the enrollment of clinical trials, it is crucial to
also have symptoms present. The most prominent symptom of
SIBO is bloating. As such, this symptom should be considered
mandatory for enrollment in a clinical trial and the primary
enrollment symptom. However, other features of SIBO could
also be examined as secondary symptoms, such as diarrhea,
abdominal pain, ﬂatulence, belching, and even constipation (in
the case of methane). Although there is no threshold for
bloating, in the absence of a validated PRO, this primary
symptom of SIBO should be experienced by the patient during
entry enrollment a minimum of 50% of days.
Outcome measures
In the case of classic SIBO with a positive hydrogen breath test,
endpoints should be an improvement in bloating in conjunction
with normalization of the hydrogen breath test (postintervention
rise in hydrogen ,20 ppm above baseline within 90 minutes of
Table 6. Proposed study enrollment and outcome considerations for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth clinical trials
Gas type
Study stage
Proposed criteria
H2 positive
Enrollment
H2 $ 20 ppm within 90 minutes of lactulose or glucose and bloating (moderate
to severe) at least 50% of days
Or
Sterile method duodenal aspirate with coliform count on appropriate agar of .
103 CFU/mLa and bloating (moderate to severe) at least 50% of days
Postintervention outcome measure
Primary outcome measure: reduction of bloating severity or frequency by 50%
plus normal H2 breath test (,20 ppm at or before 90 minutes) or duodenal
aspirate on ,103 CFU/mLa
Key secondary outcome: reduction in diarrhea if part of inclusion criteria
Exploratory secondary endpoints: Improvements in abdominal pain, urgency,
belching, flatulence, and frequency of stool
CH4 positive
Enrollment
CH4 $ 10 ppm at any point during the first 90 minutes of the breath test and
constipation (,3 CSBM/week)
Postintervention outcome measure
Primary outcome measure: improvement in constipation severity (increase in
number of CSBM/week by .1 and normalization of CH4 (no CH4 $ 10 ppm
within 90 minutes)
Key secondary outcome: improvement in bloating by .50% (frequency or
severity)
Exploratory secondary endpoints: improvements in abdominal pain, straining,
incomplete evacuation, SBM, and belching
aNote that duodenal aspirates may be considered an undue burden and risk to study subjects being performed before and after clinical interventions.
CFU/mL, colony-forming units per milliliter; CSBM, complete spontaneous bowel movements; ppm, parts per million; SBM, spontaneous bowel movements.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
174
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
lactulose or glucose). A key secondary endpoint in hydrogen
subjects could be diarrhea or loose stool. Other symptoms would
be exploratory secondary endpoints.
Methane would be considered a special case. Since con-
stipation is a key feature of methane, these symptoms could be
considered as the primary symptom and endpoint with bloating
as a key secondary outcome. For methane, a postintervention
methane of no greater than 10 ppm would be considered suc-
cessful eradication. However, since methane production and
constipation have been shown to be correlated, a key secondary
endpoint could be reduction in methane from baseline with
corresponding reduction in constipation.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As this guideline points out, although indirect measures for
SIBO evaluation using breath testing are the most practical
approach to SIBO research, part of the challenge is that current
breath testing technology provides an incomplete picture of the
fermentation dynamics in the gut. Figure 2 illustrates the in-
terrelationship between classes of organism in the gut and their
fermentation products. The reason hydrogen has not correlated
with symptoms clearly in clinical trial could be that hydrogen is
consumed in the gut to produce methane and H2S gases. As
such, measuring only methane and hydrogen produces an in-
complete picture. Future studies are examining the role of
measuring all 3 gases during breath testing. The value of these in
overgrowth assessment may provide greater clarity and symp-
tom correlation. Also, it is important to develop validated
questionnaires and PROs for SIBO, as symptoms lack speciﬁc-
ity. Furthermore, advancements are taking place in indirect
microbiome testing. One such area is to assess breath volatile
substances by mass spectroscopy. This work is in the early stages
but oﬀers a great deal of promise for future considerations.
As these unfold, what was once SIBO may become a collection
of conditions named for the speciﬁc organism(s) that are re-
sponsible for the phenotype.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This guideline was produced in collaboration with the Practice
Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology.
The committee gives special thanks to Scott Fink, MD, who served as
guideline monitor for this document, and to Bryan G. Sauer, MD,
MSc, FACG, who assisted with the GRADE methodology process.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Guarantor of the article: Mark Pimentel, MD, FRCP(C), FACG.
Speciﬁc author contributions: M.P., R.J.S., M.D.L., B.G.S., and
S.S.C.R. wrote, reviewed, and edited the manuscript. All authors have
approved the ﬁnal submission.
Financial support: None to report.
Potential competing interests: S.S.C.R. has received grant support
from Progenity and Salix Pharmaceuticals (now Bausch Health) and
is on the advisory boards for Progenity and Salix Pharmaceuticals.
M.D.L. is a consultant for Takeda, Pﬁzer, Janssen, UCB, AbbVie,
Valeant, Salix, Target Pharmasolutions, and Prometheus, and has
received grant support from Pﬁzer and Takeda. R.J.S. is a consultant
for Takeda. MP has equity in Gemelli Biotech and is a consultant for
Synthetic Biologics. M.P. is also a consultant for and received grant
support from Salix Pharmaceuticals. Cedars-Sinai has a licensing
agreement with Bausch Health and Gemelli Biotech.
REFERENCES
1.
Sachdev AH, Pimentel M. Antibiotics for irritable bowel syndrome:
Rationale and current evidence. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2012;14:
439–45.
2.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, et al. The human microbiome
project. Nature 2007;449:804–10.
3.
Pimentel M. The prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in
irritable bowel syndrome: IBS vs healthy controls (not historical
deﬁnitions). Gut 2008;57:1334–5.
4.
Majewski M, McCallum RW. Results of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowthtesting in irritablebowel syndromepatients: Clinical proﬁles
and eﬀects of antibiotic trial. Adv Med Sci 2007;52:139–42.
5.
Shah A, Morrison M, Burger D, et al. Systematic review with meta-
analysis: The prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2019;49:624–35.
6.
Tauber M, Avouac J, Benahmed A, et al. Prevalence and predictors of
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in systemic sclerosis patients with
gastrointestinal symptoms. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2014;32:S-82–7.
7.
Vantrappen G, Janssens J, Hellemans J, et al. The interdigestive motor
complex of normal subjects and patients with bacterial overgrowth of
the small intestine. J Clin Invest 1977;59:1158–66.
8.
Husebye E, Skar V, Høverstad T, et al. Abnormal intestinal motor
patterns explain enteric colonization with gram-negative bacilli in late
radiation enteropathy. Gastroenterology 1995;109:1078–89.
9.
Fukui H, Wiest R. Changes of intestinal functions in liver cirrhosis.
Inﬂamm Intest Dis 2016;1:24–40.
10.
Fialho A, Fialho A, Thota P, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is
associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Gastrointestin Liver
Dis 2016;25:159–65.
11.
Paik CN, Choi MG, Lim CH, et al. The role of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth in postgastrectomy patients. Neurogastroenterol Motil
2011;23:e191–6.
12.
Rezaie A,BuresiM,LemboA,etal.Hydrogenand methane-basedbreath
testing in gastrointestinal disorders: The North American consensus.
Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:775–84.
13.
GuyattG,OxmanAD,Akl EA,etal.GRADEguidelines:1.Introduction-
GRADE evidence proﬁles and summary of ﬁndings tables. J Clin
Epidemiol 2011;64:383–94.
14.
Khoshini R, Dai SC, Lezcano S, et al. A systematic review of diagnostic
tests for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Dig Dis Sci 2008;53:
1443–54.
15.
Levitt MD, Bond JH Jr. Volume, composition, and source of intestinal
gas. Gastroenterology 1970;59:921–9.
Figure 2. Gas dynamics in the gastrointestinal tract.
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
175
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
16.
Gasbarrini A, Corazza GR, Gasbarrini G, et al. Methodology and
indications of H2-breath testing in gastrointestinal diseases: The Rome
consensus conference. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;29(Suppl 1):1–49.
17.
Ghoshal UC, Ghoshal U. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and other
intestinal disorders. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2017;46:103–20.
18.
Polkowska-Pruszynska B, Gerkowicz A, Szczepanik-Kulak P, et al. Small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth in systemic sclerosis: A review of the
literature. Arch Dermatol Res 2019;311:1–8.
19.
Erdogan A, Rao SS. Small intestinal fungal overgrowth. Curr
Gastroenterol Rep 2015;17:16.
20.
Erdogan A, Rao SS, Gulley D, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth:
Duodenal aspiration vs glucose breath test. Neurogastroenterol Motil
2015;27:481–9.
21.
Jacobs C, Coss Adame E, Attaluri A, et al. Dysmotility and proton pump
inhibitor use are independent risk factors for small intestinal bacterial
and/or fungal overgrowth. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;37:1103–11.
22.
Zaidel O, Lin HC. Uninvited guests: The impact of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth on nutritional status. Pract Gastroenterol 2003;7:
27–34.
23.
Rao SSC, Rehman A, Yu S, et al. Brain fogginess, gas and bloating: A link
between SIBO, probiotics and metabolic acidosis. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2018;9:162.
24.
Baker J, Eswaran S, Saad R, et al. Abdominal symptoms are common and
beneﬁt from biofeedback therapy in patients with dyssynergic
defecation. Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2015;6:e105.
25.
Rezaie A, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. The place of antibiotics in management
of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Arch Med Sci 2010;6:49–55.
26.
Krajmalnik-Brown R, Ilhan Z-E, Kang D-W, et al. Eﬀects of gut
microbes on nutrient absorption and energy regulation. Nutr Clin Pract
2012;27:201–14.
27.
Gaci N, Borrel G, Tottey W, et al. Archaea and the human gut: New
beginning of an old story. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:16062–78.
28.
Newman A. Breath-analysis tests in gastroenterology. Gut 1974;15:
308–23.
29.
Erdogan ALY, Badger C, Hall P, et al. What is the optimal threshold for
an increase in hydrogen and methane levels with glucose breath test
(GBT) for detection of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)?
Gastroenterology 2014;146:S-532.
30.
Bhagatwala JSA, Leelasinjaroen P, Tetangco E, et al. Investigation of
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) in diabetics using fructose
breath test. Gastroenterology 2018;154:53–4.
31.
Lin ECK, Pichetshote N, Rezaie A, et al. Measurement of hydrogen
sulﬁde during breath testing correlates to patient symptoms.
Gastroenterology 2017;152:205–6.
32.
Pyleris E, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Tzivras D, et al. The prevalence of
overgrowth by aerobic bacteria in the small intestine by small bowel
culture: Relationshipwith irritablebowel syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 2012;57:
1321–9.
33.
Giamarellos-Bourboulis E, Tang J, Pyleris E, et al. Molecular assessment
of diﬀerences in the duodenal microbiome in subjects with irritable
bowel syndrome. Scand J Gastroenterol 2015;50:1076–87.
34.
Kerckhoﬀs AP, Ben-Amor K, Samsom M, et al. Molecular analysis of
faecal and duodenal samples reveals signiﬁcantly higher prevalence and
numbersofPseudomonasaeruginosain irritablebowelsyndrome.JMed
Microbiol 2011;60:236–45.
35.
Leite G, Villanueva-Millan MJ, Celly S, et al. 4—First large scale study
deﬁning the characteristic microbiome signatures of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth (SIBO): Detailed analysis from the reimagine
study. Gastroenterology 2019;156:S-1–2.
36.
Li G, Yang M, Jin Y, et al. Involvement of shared mucosal-associated
microbiota in the duodenum and rectum in diarrhea-predominant
irritable bowel syndrome. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;33:1220–6.
37.
Sundin OH, Mendoza-Ladd A, Morales E, et al. Does a glucose-based
hydrogen and methane breath test detect bacterial overgrowth in the
jejunum? Neurogastroenterol Motil 2018;30:e13350.
38.
Erdogan A, Rao SS, Gulley D, et al. Possible underestimation of SIBO in
IBS patients: Is lack of glucose breath test standardization responsible?
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015;27:1192–3.
39.
Romagnuolo J, Schiller D, Bailey RJ. Using breath tests wisely
in a gastroenterology practice: An evidence-based review of
indications and pitfalls in interpretation. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;
96:1113–26.
40.
Kalantar-Zadeh K, Berean KJ, Ha N, et al. A human pilot trial of
ingestibleelectronic capsulescapableof sensingdiﬀerent gases inthe gut.
Nat Electronics 2018;1:79–87.
41.
Singh S, Allan N, Wahl C, et al. Sa1717—Development of a swallowable
diganostic capsule to monitor gastrointestinal health. Gastroenterology
2019;156:S-376.
42.
Shah ED, Basseri RJ, Chong K, et al. Abnormal breath testing in IBS: A
meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci 2010;55:2441–9.
43.
Lembo A, Pimentel M, Rao SS, et al. Repeat treatment with rifaximin is
safe and eﬀective in patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel
syndrome. Gastroenterology 2016;151:1113–21.
44.
Rezaie A, Heimanson Z, Israel RJ, et al. Lactulose breath testing predicts
the response to rifaximin—Program no. P299. World Congress of
Gastroenterology at ACG 2017 Meeting. Orlando, FL, 2017.
45.
Code CF, Marlett JA. The interdigestive myo-electric complex of the
stomach and small bowel of dogs. J Physiol 1975;246:289–309.
46.
Rao SSC, Tan G, Abdulla H, et al. Does colectomy predispose to small
intestinal bacterial (SIBO) and fungal overgrowth (SIFO)? Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2018;9:146.
47.
Bures J, Cyrany J, Kohoutova D, et al. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 2010;16:2978–90.
48.
Petrone P, Sarkisyan G, Fernandez M, et al. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth in patients with lower gastrointestinal symptoms and
a history of previous abdominal surgery. Arch Surg 2011;146:444–7.
49.
Yamini D, Pimentel M. Irritable bowel syndrome and small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth. J Clin Gastroenterol 2010;44:672–5.
50.
Kim DB, Paik CN, Kim YJ, et al. Positive glucose breath tests in patients
with hysterectomy, gastrectomy, and cholecystectomy. Gut Liver 2017;
11:237–42.
51.
Newberry C, Tierney A, Pickett-Blakely O. Lactulose hydrogen breath
test result is associated with age and gender. Biomed Res Int 2016;2016:
1064029.
52.
Choung RS, RuﬀKC, Malhotra A, et al. Clinical predictors of small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth by duodenal aspirate culture. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2011;33:1059–67.
53.
Barboza JL, Okun MS, Moshiree B. The treatment of gastroparesis,
constipation and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome in
patients with Parkinson’s disease. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2015;16:
2449–64.
54.
Lauritano EC, Bilotta AL, Gabrielli M, et al. Association between
hypothyroidism and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:4180–4.
55.
Mulak A, Bonaz B. Brain-gut-microbiota axis in Parkinson’s disease.
World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:10609–20.
56.
Strid H, Simren M, Stotzer PO, et al. Patients with chronic renal failure
have abnormal small intestinal motility and a high prevalence of small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Digestion 2003;67:129–37.
57.
Jigar Bhagatwala SWY, Erdogan A, Leelasinjaroen P, et al. Altered small
bowel motility and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: Time to target
the culprit? Gastroenterology 2016;150:97.
58.
Riordan SM, McIver CJ, Wakeﬁeld D, et al. Serum immunoglobulin and
soluble IL-2 receptor levels in small intestinal overgrowth with
indigenous gut ﬂora. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:939–44.
59.
Kett K, Baklien K, Bakken A, et al. Intestinal B-cell isotype response in
relation to local bacterial load: Evidence for immunoglobulin A subclass
adaptation. Gastroenterology 1995;109:819–25.
60.
Belitsos PC, Greenson JK, Yardley JH, et al. Association of gastric
hypoacidity with opportunistic enteric infections in patients with AIDS.
J Infect Dis 1992;166:277–84.
61.
Pignata C, Budillon G, Monaco G, et al. Jejunal bacterial overgrowth and
intestinal permeability in children with immunodeﬁciency syndromes.
Gut 1990;31:879–82.
62.
Lasa JS, Zubiaurre I, Fanjul I, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
prevalence in celiac disease patients is similar in healthy subjects and
lower in irritablebowel syndrome patients. Rev Gastroenterol Mex 2015;
80:171–4.
63.
Rubio-Tapia A, Barton SH, Rosenblatt JE, et al. Prevalence of small
intestine bacterial overgrowth diagnosed by quantitative culture of
intestinal aspirate in celiac disease. J Clin Gastroenterol 2009;43:157–61.
64.
Sanchez-Montes C, Ortiz V, Bastida G, et al. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth in inactive Crohn’s disease: Inﬂuence of thiopurine and
biological treatment. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:13999–4003.
65.
Bauer TM, Steinbr¨uckner B, Brinkmann FE, et al. Small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth in patients with cirrhosis: Prevalence and relation
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
176
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:
2962–7.
66.
Therrien A, Bouchard S, Sidani S, et al. Prevalence of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth among chronic pancreatitis patients: A case-
control study. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;2016:7424831.
67.
Fridge JL,ConradC, GersonL, etal.Risk factorsforsmallbowelbacterial
overgrowth in cystic ﬁbrosis. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2007;44:
212–8.
68.
Pimentel M, Wallace D, Hallegua D, et al. A link between irritable bowel
syndrome and ﬁbromyalgia may be related to ﬁndings on lactulose
breath testing. Ann Rheum Dis 2004;63:450–2.
69.
Gabbard SL, Lacy BE, Levine GM, et al. The impact of alcohol
consumption and cholecystectomy on small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth. Dig Dis Sci 2014;59:638–44.
70.
Zhang Y, Liu G, Duan Y, et al. Prevalence of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth in multiple sclerosis: A case-control study from China.
J Neuroimmunol 2016;301:83–7.
71.
Saltzman JR, Kowdley KV, Pedrosa MC, et al. Bacterial overgrowth
without clinical malabsorption in elderly hypochlorhydric subjects.
Gastroenterology 1994;106:615–23.
72.
Husebye E, Skar V, Høverstad T, et al. Fasting hypochlorhydria with
gram positive gastric ﬂora is highly prevalent in healthy old people. Gut
1992;33:1331–7.
73.
Spiegel BM, Chey WD, Chang L. Bacterial overgrowth and irritable
bowel syndrome: Unifying hypothesis or a spurious consequence of
proton pump inhibitors? Am J Gastroenterol 2008;103:2972–6.
74.
Franco DL, Disbrow MB, Kahn A, et al. Duodenal aspirates for small
intestine bacterial overgrowth: Yield, PPIs, and outcomes after
treatment at a Tertiary Academic Medical Center. Gastroenterol Res
Pract 2015;2015:971582.
75.
Lombardo L, Foti M, Ruggia O, et al. Increased incidence of small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth during proton pump inhibitor therapy.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:504–8.
76.
Ratuapli SK, Ellington TG, O’Neill MT, et al. Proton pump inhibitor
therapy use does not predispose to small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Am J Gastroenterol 2012;107:730–5.
77.
Su T, Lai S, Lee A, et al. Meta-analysis: Proton pump inhibitors
moderately increase the risk of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
J Gastroenterol 2018;53:27–36.
78.
Compare D, Pica L, Rocco A, et al. Eﬀects of long-term PPI treatment on
producing bowel symptoms and SIBO. Eur J Clin Invest 2011;41:380–6.
79.
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Pyleris E, Barbatzas C, et al. Small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth is associated with irritable bowel syndrome and is
independent of proton pump inhibitor usage. BMC Gastroenterol 2016;
16:67.
80.
Weitsman S, Leite G, Celly S, et al. 979—A large scale evaluation of the
small intestinal microbiome in subjects on proton pump inhibitors.
Gastroenterology 2019;156:S-206.
81.
Chatterjee S, Park S, Low K, et al. The degree of breath methane
production in IBS correlates with the severity of constipation. Am J
Gastroenterol 2007;102:837–41.
82.
Attaluri A, Jackson M, Valestin J, et al. Methanogenic ﬂora is associated
with altered colonic transit but not stool characteristics in constipation
without IBS. Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:1407–11.
83.
Hwang L, Low K, Khoshini R, et al. Evaluating breath methane as
a diagnostic test for constipation-predominant IBS. Dig Dis Sci 2010;55:
398–403.
84.
Kunkel D, Basseri RJ, Makhani MD, et al. Methane on breath testing is
associated with constipation: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Dig Dis Sci 2011;56:1612–8.
85.
Pimentel M, Lin HC, Enayati P, et al. Methane, a gas produced by enteric
bacteria, slows intestinal transit and augments small intestinal
contractile activity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:
G1089–95.
86.
Jahng J, Jung IS, Choi EJ,et al.The eﬀects of methaneand hydrogengases
produced by enteric bacteria on ileal motility and colonic transit time.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2012;24:185–90, e92.
87.
Park YM,Lee YJ, HussainZ, et al. The eﬀects and mechanismof action of
methane on ileal motor function. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2017;29:
e13077.
88.
Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis ML. Towards a natural system of
organisms: Proposal for the domains archaea, bacteria, and eucarya.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:4576–9.
89.
Miller TL, Wolin MJ. Enumeration of Methanobrevibacter smithii in
human feces. Arch Microbiol 1982;131:14–8.
90.
Kim G, Deepinder F, Morales W, et al. Methanobrevibacter smithii is the
predominant methanogen in patients with constipation-predominant
IBS and methane on breath. Dig Dis Sci 2012;57:3213–8.
91.
Gatta L, Scarpignato C. Systematic review with meta-analysis: Rifaximin
is eﬀective and safe for the treatment of small intestine bacterial
overgrowth. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;45:604–16.
92.
Deng L, Liu Y, Zhang D, et al. Prevalence and treatment of small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth in postoperative patients with colorectal
cancer. Mol Clin Oncol 2016;4:883–7.
93.
Zhang Y, Feng Y, Cao B, et al. Eﬀects of SIBO and rifaximin therapy on
MHE caused by hepatic cirrhosis. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:2954–7.
94.
Castiglione F, Rispo A, Di Girolamo E, et al. Antibiotic treatment of
small bowel bacterial overgrowth in patients with Crohn’s disease.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2003;18:1107–12.
95.
Sajjad A, Mottershead M, Syn WK, et al. Ciproﬂoxacin suppresses
bacterial overgrowth, increases fasting insulin but does not correct low
acylated ghrelin concentration in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2005;22:291–9.
96.
Lisowska A, Pogorzelski A, Oracz G, et al. Oral antibiotic therapy
improves fat absorption in cystic ﬁbrosis patients with small intestine
bacterial overgrowth. J Cyst Fibros 2011;10:418–21.
97.
Lewis SJ, Potts LF, Malhotra R, et al. Small bowel bacterial overgrowth in
subjects living in residential care homes. Age Ageing 1999;28:181–5.
98.
Ghoshal UC, Srivastava D, Misra A, et al. A proof-of-concept study
showing antibiotics to be more eﬀective in irritablebowel syndrome with
than without small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth: A randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;28:281–9.
99.
Attar A, Flouri´e B, Rambaud JC, et al. Antibiotic eﬃcacy in small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth-related chronic diarrhea: A crossover,
randomized trial. Gastroenterology 1999;117:794–7.
100. Shindo K, Machida M, Fukumura M, et al. Omeprazole induces altered
bile acid metabolism. Gut 1998;42:266–71.
101. Tahan S, Melli LCFL, Mello CS, et al. Eﬀectiveness of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole and metronidazole in the treatment of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth in children living in a slum. J Pediatr Gastroenterol
Nutr 2013;57:316–8.
102. Lauritano EC, Gabrielli M, Scarpellini E, et al. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth recurrence after antibiotic therapy. Am J Gastroenterol
2008;103:2031–5.
103. Marie I, Ducrott´e P, Denis P, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
in systemic sclerosis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2009;48:1314–9.
104. Pimentel M, Chow EJ, Lin HC. Normalization of lactulose breath testing
correlates with symptom improvement in irritable bowel syndrome: A
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Am J
Gastroenterol 2003;98:412–9.
105. Low K, Hwang L, Hua J, et al. A combination of rifaximin and neomycin
is most eﬀective in treating irritable bowel syndrome patients with
methane on lactulose breath test. J Clin Gastroenterol 2010;44:547–50.
106. Dionne J, Ford AC, Yuan Y, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
evaluating the eﬃcacy of a gluten-free diet and a low FODMAPs diet in
treating symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol
2018;113:1290–300.
107. Ong DK, Mitchell SB, Barrett JS, et al. Manipulation of dietary short
chain carbohydrates alters the pattern of gas production and genesis of
symptoms in irritablebowel syndrome. J GastroenterolHepatol 2010;25:
1366–73.
108. McIntosh K, Reed DE, Schneider T, et al. FODMAPs alter symptoms
and the metabolome of patients with IBS: A randomised controlled trial.
Gut 2017;66:1241–51.
109. Husebye E, Hellstr¨om PM, Sundler F, et al. Inﬂuence of microbialspecies
on small intestinal myoelectric activity and transit in germ-free rats. Am
J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2001;280:G368–80.
110. Kumar K, Saadi M, Ramsey FV, et al. Eﬀect of Biﬁdobacterium infantis
35624 (Align) on the lactulose breath test for small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth. Dig Dis Sci 2018;63:989–95.
111. Leventogiannis K, Gkolfakis P, Spithakis G, et al. Eﬀect of a preparation
of four probiotics on symptoms of patients with irritable bowel
syndrome: Association with intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Probiotics
Antimicrob Proteins 2019;11:627–34.
© 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
177
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
112. Zhong C, Qu C, Wang B, et al. Probiotics for preventing and treating
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: A meta-analysis and systematic
review of current evidence. J Clin Gastroenterol 2017;51:300–11.
113. Allegretti JR, Kassam Z, Chan WW. Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth: Should screening be included in the pre-fecal microbiota
transplantation evaluation? Dig Dis Sci 2018;63:193–7.
114. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Important safety alert
regarding use of fecal microbiota for transplantation and risk of
serious adverse reactions due to transmission of multi-drug resistant
organisms. 2019 (https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/
safety-availability-biologics/important-safety-alert-regarding-use-
fecal-microbiota-transplantation-and-risk-serious-adverse).
Accessed June 28, 2019.
115. Chang BW, Rezaie A. Irritable bowel syndrome-like symptoms
following fecal microbiota transplantation: A possible donor-dependent
complication. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:186–7.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY
VOLUME 115 | FEBRUARY 2020
www.amjgastro.com
Pimentel et al.
178
Copyright © 2020 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
