Journal Pre-proof
AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert
Review
Eamonn MM. Quigley, MD, FACP, FRCP, MACG, Joseph A. Murray, MD, Mark
Pimentel, MD, FRCP(C)
PII:
S0016-5085(20)34928-3
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.090
Reference:
YGAST 63615
To appear in:
Gastroenterology
Accepted Date: 1 June 2020
Please cite this article as: Quigley EM, Murray JA, Pimentel M, AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small
Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert Review, Gastroenterology (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1053/
j.gastro.2020.06.090.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2020 by the AGA Institute
1 
 
 
AGA Clinical Practice Update on Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Expert 
Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1Eamonn MM Quigley, MD, FACP, FRCP, MACG1; Joseph A. Murray, MD2; Mark 
Pimentel, MD, FRCP(C)3 
 
 
 
1Lynda K and David M Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Houston Methodist 
Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, Texas 
 
2Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota  
 
3Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los 
Angeles, California 
 
 
Word Count: 2994 
 
 
 
Corresponding Author: 
 
Eamonn MM Quigley, MD, FRCP FACP MACG FRCPI MWGO 
Lynda K and David M Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders 
Houston Methodist Hospital and Well Cornell Medical College 
6550 Fannin St, SM1201 
Houston 
Texas 77030 
USA 
equigley@houstonmethodist.org 
 
 
2 
 
Conflicts of Interest: 
EMMQ serves as a consultant to 4D Pharma, Alimentary Health, Allergan, Biocodex, 
Ironwood, Salix and Vibrant; receives research support from 4D Pharma, Biomerica, 
Takeda, Vibrant and Zealand; holds patents with and equity in Alimentary Health.   
JAM has grant support from ImmusanT Inc., Allakos Inc., Oberkotter Foundation, Cour 
Inc.; is a consultant to Bionix, Lilly Research Laboratory, Johnson & Johnson, Dr. Schar 
USA Inc., UCB Biopharma, Innovate Biopharmaceuticals, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, 
Celimmune, Amgen, Intrexon Corporation, Kanyos, and Boehringer Ingelheim; holds 
patents licensed to Evelo Biosciences Inc.; and receives royalties from Torax Medical. 
MP serves as a consultant and received grant support from Salix Pharmaceuticals. MP 
is also consults for US Medical and Shire. MP has equity and consults for Gemelli 
Biotech, Naia Pharmaceuticals, and Synthetic Biologics. Cedars-Sinai has a licensing 
agreement with Bausch Health, Naia Pharmaceuticals, Synthetic Biologics and Gemelli 
Biotech. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
This expert review was commissioned and approved by the AGA Institute Clinical 
Practice Updates Committee (CPUC) and the AGA Governing Board to provide timely 
guidance on a topic of high clinical importance to the AGA membership, and 
underwent internal peer review by the CPUC and external peer review through 
standard procedures of the journal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms: 
CH4 – methane 
CFU – colony forming units 
FDA – Food and Drugs Administration 
GI – gastrointestinal 
H2 – hydrogen 
IBS – irritable bowel syndrome 
IMO – intestinal methanogen overgrowth 
OR – odds ratio 
SIBO – small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
TARGET – Targeted, non-systemic, Antibiotic, Rifaximin, Gut–selective, Evaluation of 
Treatment for non–C IBS 
 
 
5 
 
US – United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Description 
Thanks to ready access to hydrogen breath testing, small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth is now commonly diagnosed among individuals presenting with a variety 
of gastrointestinal and even non-gastrointestinal complaints and is increasingly 
implicated, in lay press and media in the causation of a diverse array of disorders. Its 
definition, however, remains controversial and true prevalence, accordingly, 
undefined. The purpose of this review, therefore, was to provide a historical 
6 
 
background to the concept of SIBO, critically review current concepts of SIBO 
(including symptomatology, pathophysiology, clinical consequences, diagnosis and 
treatment), define unanswered questions and provide a road map towards their 
resolution.  
Methods 
Best Practice Advice (BPA) statements were developed following discussion by the 
three authors. EMMQ and MP each developed text around certain BPAs based upon 
a review of available literature. A complete draft was reviewed by all three authors 
and following discussion, re-drafting and further review and revision a final draft was 
agreed upon by all authors.  
Best Practice Advice Statements 
1. The definition of SIBO as a clinical entity lacks precision and 
consistency; it is a term generally applied to a clinical disorder where 
symptoms, clinical signs and/or laboratory abnormalities are attributed 
to changes in the numbers of bacteria or in the composition of the 
bacterial population in the small intestine. 
2. Symptoms traditionally linked to SIBO include bloating, diarrhea and 
abdominal pain/discomfort. Steatorrhea may be seen in more severe 
cases.  
3. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of inflammatory 
markers such as fecal calprotectin to detect SIBO.   
4. Lab findings can include elevated folate and, less commonly, vitamin 
B12 deficiency, or other nutritional deficiencies.   
7 
 
5. A major impediment to our ability to accurately define SIBO is our 
limited understanding of normal small intestinal microbial populations– 
progress in sampling technology and techniques to enumerate bacterial 
populations and their metabolic products should provide much needed 
clarity. 
6. Controversy remains concerning the role of SIBO in the pathogenesis of 
common functional symptoms such as those regarded as components 
of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 
7. Management should focus on the identification and correction (where 
possible) of underlying causes, correction of nutritional deficiencies 
and the administration of antibiotics. This is especially important for 
patients with significant maldigestion and malabsorption. 
8. While IBS has been shown to respond to therapy with a poorly absorbed 
antibiotic, the role of SIBO or its eradication in the genesis of this 
response warrants further confirmation in randomized controlled trials. 
9. There is a limited database to guide the clinician in developing antibiotic 
strategies for SIBO, in any context. Therapy remains, for the most part, 
empiric but must be ever mindful of the potential risks of long-term 
broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is increasingly recognized among patients 
presenting to a gastroenterologist; providing the impetus to critically evaluate methods 
for its recognition. Modern molecular techniques, such as next generation sequencing, 
have, to date, focused on stool samples, but new studies are beginning to reveal the 
detailed composition of the small bowel microbiome. In this best practice advice article, 
we examine the background to our current concept of SIBO and discuss persisting 
controversies.  
 
1. The definition of SIBO as a clinical entity lacks precision and consistency; 
it is a term generally applied to a clinical disorder where symptoms, clinical 
signs and/or laboratory abnormalities are attributed to changes in the 
numbers of bacteria or in the composition of the bacterial population in the 
small intestine. 
 
The origins of the term small intestinal bacterial overgrowth lie in a literature exploring 
causes of malabsorption among individuals with surgically created blind loops, intestinal 
fistula, jejunal diverticulosis and intestinal pseudo-obstruction (1). In elegant studies, the 
ability of a Gram-negative flora of presumed colonic origin to metabolize amino acids, 
deconjugate bile acids, consume vitamin B12, synthesize folic acid and injure the small 
intestinal mucosa was demonstrated and a scientific basis for the resultant 
malabsorption syndrome provided (2-4). Coliforms and Escherichia coli, in particular, 
emerged as prime suspects. Clinical improvement in, or resolution of, symptom with 
antibiotics clinched the diagnosis.  
The search for a more tangible, quantitative definition drew on two sources, intubation 
studies of the normal proximal small intestine (5) and an examination of relationships 
between bacterial numbers in the proximal jejunum and a variety of parameters 
9 
 
indicative of, or linked to, the malabsorption syndrome (6). From these initial studies the 
now time-honored criterion of >105 bacteria per ml of jejunal fluid emerged as the 
diagnostic standard for SIBO. This allowed clinicians to look beyond the confines of a 
classical malabsorption syndrome and explore the contribution of SIBO to other clinical 
scenarios (7). The widespread application of jejunal aspiration was limited by its 
invasive nature, problems with contamination and challenges in bacterial culture 
(detailed below). The modern era of SIBO was ushered in by the advent of hydrogen 
breath tests (8). Initially employed in the diagnosis of carbohydrate malabsorption, 
hydrogen breath tests were soon applied to measure oro-cecal transit and detect 
bacterial overgrowth (9). Due to their simplicity and acceptability, glucose and lactulose 
breath tests came to dominate the field; they are the basis for virtually all the recent 
literature on SIBO (10). They came with baggage - issues such as variability in study 
protocol, interference from confounding factors and an ongoing debate on diagnostic 
cut-offs continue to haunt us and preclude a universally accepted definition of SIBO 
based on breath testing. Pending the precise enumeration and characterization of the 
microbial population of the normal small intestine (11) and mindful of all of the 
limitations discussed above, a very recent definition, which seems to bring us back to 
where we began, seems most appropriate: “the presence of excessive numbers of 
bacteria in the small bowel, causing gastrointestinal symptoms” (12).  
 
2. Symptoms traditionally linked to SIBO include bloating, diarrhea and 
abdominal pain/discomfort. Steatorrhea may be seen in more severe cases.  
 
 
10 
 
What should prompt a search for the presence of SIBO? No one would contest the 
causative link between SIBO and maldigestion and malabsorption as seen, for example, 
in the presence of jejunal diverticulosis or entero-colonic fistulae. Here, the ability to 
suspect and diagnose SIBO is largely dependent on the ability to appreciate context; an 
awareness of the disorders and clinical scenarios associated with risk for SIBO (Table 
1) is critical. In the very elderly, SIBO has been recognized as an important cause of 
otherwise unexplained diarrhea and weight loss (7). As an indicator of the relative 
contributions of various factors to SIBO, one large retrospective series based on 
duodenal aspirates obtained from patients under investigation for a variety of problems, 
found that the main risk factors for SIBO were older age, steatorrhea and the use of 
narcotics; significantly associated disorders were inflammatory bowel disease, chronic 
pancreatitis and jejunal diverticulosis (13).   
The various clinical entities listed on Table 1 taken in aggregate account, one suspects, 
for a small minority of those diagnosed with SIBO nowadays; what prompts the search 
for SIBO in the rest? This question can be addressed in one of two ways. First, one can 
look for associations, preferably in prospective studies of unselected individuals, 
between SIBO and certain clinical presentations. Second, one can examine response 
rates to the eradication of SIBO.  For the first we rely mostly on retrospective case 
series – data that clearly suffers from acquisition bias; why did the clinician order the 
test in the first place? The second source is equally problematic as there have been few 
high quality clinical trials and eradication regimens are far from universally effective 
(14). 
11 
 
There are two sources of data to address associations between SIBO and symptoms, 
populations with known risk factors for SIBO and studies on individuals with 
unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms. While recent literature attests to the occurrence 
of SIBO at higher rates than control subjects among individuals with a host of underlying 
conditions (Table 1), correlations with clinical features, such as nutritional status and 
outcomes are far from consistent - SIBO has even been linked with obesity (15).  
Are there clinical predictors of SIBO in the various disease states that it has been linked 
to? In Crohn’s disease, SIBO has been associated with disease phenotype, namely, 
fibro-stenotic disease and prior surgery, especially resection of the ileocecal valve and, 
in cirrhosis, with complications such as encephalopathy and spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis.  
What then of predictors of SIBO in the much larger patient population with 
“functional”/unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms? Here the data is equally 
uninformative. SIBO has been reported to be more common in IBS (16) and methane 
production linked to constipation. However, some studies failed to document any 
relationships between IBS, or its various clinical features, and the presence of SIBO 
(17). For the most part, diarrhea or “gas”, but not bloating, seem to be the most 
predictive symptoms of SIBO in IBS.  
To summarize: 
 
1. In those predisposed to SIBO due to anatomical, pathological, pharmacological 
or other changes that promote stasis or recirculation of colonic contents and/or 
impaired resistance to bacteria, SIBO will lead to diarrhea and can progress to a 
full-blown malabsorption syndrome. 
12 
 
 
2. Relationships between SIBO and symptoms in those without obvious 
predisposing factors are more tenuous and symptoms are weakly predictive at 
best. Contrary to common belief, diarrhea and not bloating has the strongest 
association with SIBO. 
 
3. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of inflammatory markers 
such as fecal calprotectin to detect SIBO    
 
Commonly performed laboratory tests will prove to be normal in most individuals 
considered, nowadays, to have SIBO. In severely contaminated individuals, mucosal 
injury may occur and result in loss of brush border enzymes, leading to carbohydrate 
malabsorption and, through damage to the epithelial barrier, a protein-losing 
enteropathy. Bacterial competition with the host for luminal protein may also contribute 
to hypoproteinemia and edema. In severe SIBO inflammation will develop; however, 
attempts to detect SIBO using levels of calprotectin in feces have provided mixed 
results. While some failed to detect elevated levels in association with SIBO (18), 
studies on individuals with scleroderma (19) and Crohn’s disease (20) suggested that 
elevated levels were a valuable indicator of its presence.  
 
4. Lab findings can include elevated folate and, less commonly, vitamin B12 
deficiency, or other nutritional deficiencies.   
 
In SIBO, several factors conspire to cause B12 deficiency: the consumption of cobalamin 
by anaerobes, malabsorption of the vitamin due to competitive binding with cobalamin 
from bacterially generated metabolites of cobalamin at the ileal receptor and, in more 
severe overgrowth, mucosal injury involving the binding site. Bacterial utilization of 
13 
 
vitamins has also been invoked in the development of thiamine and nicotinamide 
deficiency. Deconjugation of bile acids and consequent depletion of the bile acid pool 
will lead to maldigestion of fat and fat-soluble vitamins with resultant steatorrhea and 
fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies. While a resultant vitamin-K-responsive coagulopathy 
has been described in association with SIBO (21), bacterial production of vitamin K, 
combined with enhanced absorption of the vitamin, due to greater permeability, may 
serve, not only to sustain but even increase vitamin K levels to a degree that warfarin 
dose may need to be adjusted to maintain therapeutic anticoagulation (22). Bacterial 
synthesis of folic acid may result in the unusual combination of high folate and low B12 
levels. 
 
5. A major impediment to our ability to accurately define SIBO is our limited 
understanding of normal small intestinal microbial populations– progress 
in sampling technology and techniques to enumerate bacterial populations 
and their metabolic products should provide much needed clarity. 
 
 
While the last decade has seen an explosion in research into the gut microbiome, the 
small bowel microbiome has not been well defined even by more basic microbial 
techniques such as culture.  
a. Differentiating normal from abnormal small intestinal microbial populations  
In the last two years, there has been an effort to understand the small bowel 
microbiome as it relates to SIBO and other conditions. The challenge here is that it is 
virtually inevitable that there will be a change in how SIBO is defined depending on the 
techniques used (e.g. culture vs. next generation sequencing). Most importantly, these 
efforts will need to associate microbial data with patient symptoms.  
14 
 
The centrality of quantitative intestinal cultures to the definition of SIBO has been 
challenged (23). A recent consensus on breath testing and gastrointestinal disorders 
reevaluated definitions of SIBO based on the quantitative culture of small intestinal 
aspirates and recommended a new threshold at >103 CFU/ml coliforms on fresh 
aspirate culture (10). This change was based on a comprehensive assessment of the 
literature which revealed that bacterial levels in normal subjects rarely exceed 102 
CFU/ml with the much higher  threshold of >105 CFU/mL derived from subjects with 
altered intestinal anatomy (23).  
The details of the actual technique of aspirate and culture also deserve careful 
consideration. Obtaining a clean uncontaminated sample can be challenging. Duodenal 
aspiration requires invasive techniques such as upper endoscopy to access the small 
bowel. In addition, it is vital that the sample is acquired without contamination from oral 
flora as the scope passes through the mouth. Standardized quantitative methods of 
small intestinal cultures have long resided in a few academic medical centers with the 
expertise to do such cultures.  They were not easy to reproduce in community-based 
microbiology labs. 
More reliable techniques for small bowel aspiration, culture and sequencing have now 
emerged. In a recent study using a double-lumen custom protected catheter, samples 
were obtained in a manner that mitigated the likelihood of contamination bacteria from 
the upper GI tract when passing the catheter through the scope. This study also 
determined that the traditional handling of samples was not ideal, either for culture or for 
sequencing (24). Small intestinal fluid is mucoid, rendering it more difficult to isolate and 
culture small intestinal bacteria, or to extract DNA for microbial sequencing. By treating 
15 
 
small intestinal aspirates with a mucolytic agent (dithiothreitol) yields for culture, library 
preparation and sequencing increased (24). In a large-scale study, subjects underwent 
upper endoscopy followed by both culture and sequencing of small intestinal aspirates. 
The culture data clearly identified that the ideal cutoff for SIBO was >103 CFU/mL (25). 
This study also demonstrated, for the first time, that there was agreement between the 
identification of SIBO by breath testing (rise in H2 of ≥ 20 ppm above baseline after 
ingestion of lactulose), culture and sequencing, and the presence of clinical symptoms 
suggestive of SIBO (25). In contrast, another recent study using the traditional 
aspiration technique (single lumen catheter) and definition of SIBO (≥105 CFU/mL) 
suggested that the association between SIBO and symptoms was not supported and 
that small bowel microbial changes in functional disorders may be more related to diet 
(17). 
b. Breath Testing 
The use of breath testing in the diagnosis of SIBO has lacked universal acceptance. 
There are many reasons for this. Breath testing was never fully validated compared to 
culture of small intestinal aspirates. In addition, the usefulness of breath testing has 
been questioned. Some of the problems relate to the inconsistency with which breath 
testing is performed and interpreted. Some studies prefer glucose as the substrate, 
others lactulose. There are also wide discrepancies in thresholds for defining a positive 
breath test result.  For example, studies suggest that a positive breath test for SIBO 
requires two hydrogen peaks; this criterion has not been validated. 
Finally, it must be stressed that breath testing is more complex than simply measuring 
hydrogen (H2). Data now show that methane is also important. Methane (CH4) is 
produced by methanogens, and 4 moles of H2 are required to produce 1 mole of CH4. 
16 
 
Thus, the presence of methane suppresses H2 on the breath test. Fortunately, 
conventional breath testing measures both H2 and CH4.  
6. Controversy remains concerning the role of SIBO in the pathogenesis of 
common functional symptoms such as those regarded as components of 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 
 
There has been controversy surrounding the role of SIBO in the pathogenesis of 
symptoms of functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). A 
recent systematic review and meta-analysis concluded that SIBO was more common in 
IBS than in matched controls; on breath testing, the odds ratio (OR) for SIBO in patients 
with IBS was 4.9 and up to 33.5% of IBS subjects had SIBO based on culture compared 
to 8.2% in controls (16). They also found that lactulose breath testing yielded a higher 
rate of positive results compared to culture or glucose breath testing (16). Studies have 
also suggested that while SIBO is associated with IBS with diarrhea, methane-positive 
breath tests are linked to constipation-predominant IBS (26).  
 
7. Management of SIBO should focus on the identification and correction 
(where possible) of underlying causes, correction of nutritional 
deficiencies and the administration of antibiotics. This is especially 
important for patients with significant maldigestion and malabsorption. 
 
For all the reasons already enumerated the evaluation of the subject with suspected 
SIBO should involve the detection of related nutritional consequences as well as the 
identification of potentially correctable predisposing factors such as a blind loop, small 
bowel stricture or colo-enteric fistula. Where, as is more often the case, the underlying 
problem cannot be corrected attention should focus on the correction of any nutritional 
deficits.   
17 
 
 
8. While IBS has been shown to respond to therapy with a poorly absorbed 
antibiotic, the role of SIBO or its eradication in the genesis of this response 
warrants further confirmation in randomized controlled trials. 
 
 
Phase III studies support a role for the minimally absorbed antibiotic rifaximin in the 
management of IBS-D (27,28). While the precise mode of action of rifaximin in IBS 
remains to be defined, there is now evidence that the response to rifaximin may be 
related to the presence of SIBO (29); those with a positive breath test at baseline were 
more likely (59.7%) to improve compared to those with a negative breath test (29.8%).  
The limitation of this recent data is that breath testing was only conducted in a small 
subset of subjects with IBS. In addition, it is important to recognize that conducting 
large-scale trials to treat SIBO and examine its impact on conditions such as IBS could 
not have reliably been conducted 3-4 years ago. Recent consensus documents and 
guidelines on SIBO testing have provided a framework for standardizing breath testing 
and interpretation (10,11).  
 
 
9. There is a limited database to guide the clinician in developing antibiotic 
strategies for SIBO, in any context. Therapy remains, for the most part, 
empiric but must be ever mindful of the potential risks of long-term broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy.  
 
 
The goal of antibiotic therapy in SIBO is not to eradicate small intestinal microbiota but 
to modulate it in a manner that leads to symptomatic improvement. Ideally, the choice of 
antimicrobial agents should reflect in vitro susceptibility testing, this is usually 
impractical as different bacterial species, with different antibiotic sensitivities typically 
coexist. Antibiotic treatment remains, therefore, primarily empirical. Furthermore, the 
18 
 
data to support any one antibiotic regimen is limited. In principle, an effective antibiotic 
regimen should cover both aerobic and anaerobic enteric bacteria. A list of antibiotic 
regimens that have been used in SIBO is provided on Table 2. How long to treat for? 
Here again, there is limited guidance. In general, a single 7- to 10-day course improves 
symptoms for up to several months in 46-90% of patients with SIBO and render breath 
tests negative in 20-75% (11,30,31). 
Rifaximin has been the subject of a number of randomized controlled trials; a recent 
meta-analysis reported an overall 70% eradication rate for rifaximin in SIBO (14); dosing 
ranged from from 800 mg per day for 4 weeks to 1200 mg per day for 7 days (32-34). 
One practical challenge faced by clinicians in the US is that SIBO is not a recognized 
indication for this antibiotic and may not be covered by the patient’s insurance carrier.  
How does one manage so-called intestinal methanogen overgrowth (IMO)? One, 
uncontrolled trial suggested that the combination of neomycin and rifaximin may be 
effective (35).  
Recurrence following one course of antibiotic therapy remains an issue (up to 44% at 9 
months) and is more likely among older subjects, those who have undergone an 
appendectomy and those with a history of chronic proton pump inhibitor use (37). 
Because of recurrent symptoms, some patients will need repeated (e.g. the first 5 to 10 
days out of every month) or continuous courses of antibiotic therapy. For the latter, 
rotating antibiotic regimens are recommended to prevent the development of resistance. 
Decisions on management should be individualized and also consider such risks as 
diarrhea, Clostridium difficile infection, intolerance and cost. It is not necessary to repeat 
19 
 
diagnostic tests for SIBO following antibiotic therapy should gastrointestinal symptoms 
respond. 
             
Conclusions (Table 3) 
While there is much to do to determine the ideal approach to SIBO, recent work has lain 
the foundation for standardizing definitions and outcomes to allow for better controlled 
studies in the future.  
 
References 
1. Card WI. Blind loop syndrome. Proc R Soc Med 1959;52:28-31. 
2. Donaldson RM, Jr. Studies on the pathogenesis of steatorrhea in the blind loop 
syndrome. J Clin Invest 1965;44:1815-25. 
3. Drasar BS, Shiner M, McLeod GM. Studies on the intestinal flora. I. The bacterial 
flora of the gastrointestinal tract in healthy and achlorhydric persons. 
Gastroenterology 1969;56:71-9. 
4. Drasar BS, Shiner M. Studies on the intestinal flora. II. Bacterial flora of the small 
intestine in patients with gastrointestinal disorders. Gut 1969;10:812-9. 
5. Gorbach SL. Intestinal microflora. Gastroenterology 1971;60:1110-29. 
6. King CE, Toskes PP. Small intestine bacterial overgrowth. Gastroenterology 
1979;76:1035-55. 
7. Roberts SH, James O, Jarvis EH. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome without "blind 
loop": A cause for malnutrition in the elderly. Lancet 1977;2:1193-5. 
20 
 
8. Levitt MD. Production and excretion of hydrogen gas in man. N Engl J Med 
1969;281:122-7. 
9. Metz G, Gassull MA, Drasar BS, et al. Breath-hydrogen test for small-intestinal 
bacterial colonisation. Lancet 1976;1:668-9. 
10. Rezaie A, Buresi M, Lembo A, et al. Hydrogen and Methane-Based Breath 
Testing in Gastrointestinal Disorders: The North American Consensus. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2017;112:775-784. 
11. Quigley EMM. Symptoms and the small intestinal microbiome - the unknown 
explored. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;16:457-458. 
12. Pimentel M, Saad RJ, Long MD, et al. ACG Clinical Guideline: Small Intestinal 
Bacterial Overgrowth. Am J Gastroenterol 2020;115:165-178. 
13. Choung RS, Ruff KC, Malhotra A, et al. Clinical predictors of small intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth by duodenal aspirate culture. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2011;33:1059-67. 
14. Gatta L, Scarpignato C. Systematic review with meta-analysis: rifaximin is 
effective and safe for the treatment of small intestine bacterial overgrowth. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;45:604-616. 
15. Wijarnpreecha K, Werlang ME, Watthanasuntorn K, et al. Obesity and Risk of 
Small Intestine Bacterial Overgrowth: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. 
Dig Dis Sci 2019; Oct 11. pii: 10.1007/s10620-019-05887-x. 
16. Ford AC, Spiegel BM, Talley NJ, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in 
irritable bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009;7:1279-86. 
21 
 
17. Saffouri GB, Shields-Cutler RR, Chen J, et al. Small intestinal microbial dysbiosis 
underlies symptoms associated with functional gastrointestinal disorders. Nat 
Commun 2019;10:2012. 
18. Montalto M, Santoro L, Dalvai S, et al. Fecal calprotectin concentrations in 
patients with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Dig Dis 2008;26:183-6. 
19. Marie I, Leroi AM, Menard JF, et al. Fecal calprotectin in systemic sclerosis and 
review of the literature. Autoimmun Rev 2015;14:547-54. 
20. Ricci JERJ, Chebli LA, Ribeiro T, et al. Small-Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth is 
Associated With Concurrent Intestinal Inflammation But Not With Systemic 
Inflammation in Crohn's Disease Patients. J Clin Gastroenterol 2018;52:530-536. 
21. Oliveira RB, Martinelli ALC, Troncon LEA, et al. Small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth (SIBO) and vitamin K-responsive coagulopathy: a previously 
unrecorded association. BMJ Case Rep 2018;2018 pii: bcr-2017-223531. 
22. Giuliano V, Bassotti G, Mourvaki E, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
and warfarin dose requirement variability. Thromb Res 2010;126:12-7. 
23. Khoshini R, Dai SC, Lezcano S, et al. A systematic review of diagnostic tests for 
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Dig Dis Sci 2008;53:1443-54. 
24. Leite G, Morales W, Weitsman S, et al. Optimizing Microbiome Sequencing for 
Small Intestinal Aspirates: Validation of Novel Techniques through the 
REIMAGINE Study. BMC Microbiol 2019;19:239 doi:10.1186/s12866-019-1617-
1. 
25. Leite G, Villanueva-Millan MJ, Celly S, et al. 4 - First Large Scale Study Defining 
the Characteristic Microbiome Signatures of Small Intestinal Bacterial 
22 
 
Overgrowth (SIBO): Detailed Analysis from the Reimagine Study. 
Gastroenterology 2019;156:S-1-S-2. 
26. Kunkel D, Basseri RJ, Makhani MD, et al. Methane on breath testing is 
associated with constipation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci 
2011;56:1612-8. 
27. Pimentel M, Lembo A, Chey WD, Zakko S, Ringel Y, Yu J, Mareya SM, Shaw 
AL, Bortey E, Forbes WP; TARGET Study Group. Rifaximin therapy for patients 
with irritable bowel syndrome without constipation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:22-
32. 
28. Lembo A, Pimentel M, Rao SS, et al. Repeat Treatment With Rifaximin is Safe 
and Effective in Patients With Diarrhea-predominant Irritable Bowel Syndrome. 
Gastroenterology 2016;151:1113–1121. 
29. Rezaie A, Heimanson Z, McCallum R, Pimentel M. Lactulose Breath Testing as a 
Predictor of Response to Rifaximin in Patients With Irritable Bowel Syndrome 
With Diarrhea. Am J Gastroenterol. 2019;114:1886-1893. 
30. Pittman N, Rawn SM, Wang M, et al. Treatment of small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth in systemic sclerosis: a systematic review. Rheumatology (Oxford) 
2018;57:1802-1811. 
31. Adike A, DiBaise JK. Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth: Nutritional 
Implications, Diagnosis, and Management. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 
2018;47:193-208. 
23 
 
32. Lauritano EC, Gabrielli M, Scarpellini E, et al. Antibiotic therapy in small intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth: rifaximin versus metronidazole. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol 
Sci 2009;13:111-6. 
33. Majewski M, Reddymasu SC, Sostarich S, et al. Efficacy of rifaximin, a 
nonabsorbed oral antibiotic, in the treatment of small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth. Am J Med Sci 2007;333:266-70. 
34. Yang J, Lee HR, Low K, et al. Rifaximin versus other antibiotics in the primary 
treatment and retreatment of bacterial overgrowth in IBS. Dig Dis Sci 
2008;53:169-74. 
35. Low K, Hwang L, Hua J, et al. A combination of rifaximin and neomycin is most 
effective in treating irritable bowel syndrome patients with methane on lactulose 
breath test. J Clin Gastroenterol 2010;44:547-50. 
36. Lauritano EC, Gabrielli M, Scarpellini E, et al. Small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth recurrence after antibiotic therapy. Am J Gastroenterol 
2008;103:2031-5. 
 
24 
 
Table 1: Diseases and Disorders associated with Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth 
– a pathophysiological approach 
 
Abnormal small intestinal motility: 
- Diabetic autonomic neuropathy  
- Systemic sclerosis/scleroderma 
- Amyloidosis 
 
- Hypothyroidism 
- Idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction 
- Acromegaly 
- Gastroparesis 
- Myotonic muscular dystrophy 
- Chronic opiate use 
- Long-standing use of motility suppressing drugs 
 
Anatomic abnormalities: 
- Small intestinal diverticulosis 
- Surgically-induced alterations in anatomy (Billroth II gastrectomy, bariatric surgery, 
end- 
  to-side anastomosis) 
- Strictures (Crohn’s disease, radiation, surgery) 
- Blind loops 
- Gastrocolic or jejunocolic fistula 
- Ileo-cecal valve resection 
 
Hypochlorhydria 
- Post-surgical 
- Long-term acid suppression 
 
Immune deficiency 
- Inherited immune deficiencies (e.g. Common Variable Immuno-deficiency - CVID)  
- Acquired immune deficiency (e.g. AIDS, severe malnutrition) 
 
Multifactorial 
- Chronic pancreatitis 
- Celiac disease 
- Diabetes Mellitus 
- Tropical sprue 
- Crohn’s disease  
- Cystic fibrosis 
- Intestinal failure 
- Radiation enteropathy  
- Liver disease 
- End-stage renal disease 
25 
 
- The elderly  
 
Relationship to SIBO unclear  
- Rosacea 
- Interstitial cystitis 
- Restless legs syndrome 
- Parkinson’s disease 
- Erosive esophagitis 
- Severe obesity 
- Irritable bowel syndrome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
Table 2: Antibiotic Regimens for Treatment of SIBO 
 
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 500/125 mg TID 
Ciprofloxacin 250 mg BID 
Doxycycline 100 mg BID 
Metronidazole 250 mg TID 
Neomycin 500 mg BID 
Norfloxacin 800 mg daily 
Rifaximin 800-1200 mg daily in divided doses 
Tetracycline 250 mg QID 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 1 double strength BID 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Table 3: Takeaway Points for the Clinician 
 
Category
Takeaway Point
Symptoms 
Bloating and gas have been thought to be traditional symptoms of SIBO 
However, evidence suggests unexplained diarrhea may be more 
important 
Signs 
While malabsorption (steatorrhea and vitamin deficiency) can be seen in 
SIBO, this is uncommon in the absence of blind loops or other structural 
causes of SIBO 
Causes of 
SIBO 
There are a number of causes of SIBO 
A good rule is to consider SIBO any time there is small intestinal stasis 
There is evidence for SIBO being present in a subset of IBS subjects 
Diagnosis 
Culture is considered the gold standard with new guidance suggesting a 
cutoff of >103 CFU of coliforms /mL in duodenal aspirates. 
Breath testing (lactulose and glucose) is most commonly used to 
diagnose SIBO and appears to identify subjects likely to respond to 
treatment 
Methane on breath testing is defined differently and now termed intestinal 
methanogen overgrowth (IMO) 
Treatment 
Antibiotics are currently the mainstay of treatment  
 
 
