Journal Pre-proof
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of Moderate to Severe
Ulcerative Colitis
Joseph D. Feuerstein, MD, Kim L. Isaacs, MD, Yecheskel Schneider, MD, Shazia
Mehmood Siddique, MD, MS, Yngve Falck-Ytter, MD, Siddharth Singh, MD, MS, on
behalf of the American Gastroenterological Association Institute Clinical Guidelines
Committee
PII:
S0016-5085(20)30018-4
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.01.006
Reference:
YGAST 63119
To appear in:
Gastroenterology
Please cite this article as: Feuerstein JD, Isaacs KL, Schneider Y, Siddique SM, Falck-Ytter Y, Singh
S, on behalf of the American Gastroenterological Association Institute Clinical Guidelines Committee,
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis,
Gastroenterology (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.01.006.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2020 by the AGA Institute
1 
 
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of Moderate to Severe 
Ulcerative Colitis 
 
Joseph D. Feuerstein MD1, Kim L. Isaacs MD2, Yecheskel Schneider MD3, Shazia Mehmood 
Siddique MD, MS3, Yngve Falck-Ytter MD4, and Siddharth Singh MD, MS5 on behalf of the 
American Gastroenterological Association Institute Clinical Guidelines Committee 
1 Division of Gastroenterology and Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA  
3Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 
4 Division of Gastroenterology, Case Western Reserve University, and VA Northeast Ohio 
Healthcare System, Cleveland, Ohio 
5 Division of Gastroenterology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
Acknowledgements: The AGA Clinical Guidelines Committee included Karen Chachu MD, PhD, 
Lukejohn Day MD, AGAF, Benjamin Lebwohl MD, AGAF, Thiruvengadam Muniraj MD, PhD, 
MRCP, Amit Patel MD, Anne F. Peery, Raj Shah, Shahnaz Sultan, Harminder Singh, Siddharth 
Singh, Stuart Spechler, Grace Su, Aaron P. Thrift, Jennifer M. Weiss, and Adam V. Weizman 
Address for Correspondence: 
Chair, Clinical Guidelines Committee,  
American Gastroenterological Association 
National Office, 4930 Del Ray Avenue,  
Bethesda, Maryland 20814  
E-mail: clinicalpractice@gastro.org 
Telephone: (301) 941-2618 
 
2 
 
This document presents the official recommendations of the American Gastroenterological 
Association (AGA) on the management of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis. The guideline 
was developed by the AGA’s Clinical Practice Guideline Committee and approved by the AGA 
Governing Board. Development of this guideline and its accompanying technical review was 
fully funded by the AGA Institute with no additional outside funding.  
Conflict of interest disclosure: All members were required to complete the disclosure 
statement. These statements are maintained at the American Gastroenterological Association 
(AGA) headquarters in Bethesda, Maryland, and pertinent disclosures are published with this 
report. 
Conflicts of interest: 
Joseph D. Feuerstein has no relevant conflict to report. 
Kim L. Isaacs received research support for multi-center clinical trials and safety registries from 
Abbvie, Takeda, UCB, Janssen, and Hoffman-Laroche.  
Yecheskel Schneider has no relevant conflict to report. 
Shazia Mehmood Siddique has no relevant conflict to report. 
Yngve Falck-Ytter MD has no relevant conflict to report. 
Siddharth Singh MD has no relevant conflict to report. 
Anticipated update: 3 years from publication (2023) 
Guideline Panel: Joseph Feuerstein (Chair), Siddharth Singh (Co-chair, GRADE 
Methodologist), Kim Isaacs (Member), Yecheskel Schneider (Member), Yngve Falck-Ytter 
(Member, Chair, Clinical Guidelines Committee), Shazia Mehmood Siddique (Trainee GRADE 
Methodologist) 
3 
 
Technical Review Panel: Jessica Allegretti (Content expert), Jonathan Terdiman (Content 
expert), Siddharth Singh (GRADE Methodologist), Shazia Mehmood Siddique (Trainee GRADE 
Methodologist) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
This document presents the official recommendations of the American Gastroenterological 
Association (AGA) on the management of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis (UC). The 
guideline was developed by the AGA Institute’s Clinical Guidelines Committee and approved by 
the AGA Governing Board. It is accompanied by a technical review that provides a detailed 
synthesis of the evidence from which these recommendations were formulated.1 Development 
of this guideline and the accompanying technical review was fully funded by the AGA Institute 
without additional outside funding. Members of the guideline panel and technical review panel 
were selected by the AGA Governing Board in consultation with the Clinical Guidelines 
Committee with careful consideration of all Institute of Medicine recommendations for clinical 
guideline development. Joseph Feuerstein was the guideline panel chair and Siddharth Singh 
was the methodologist and co-chair of the guideline panel. A patient representative was also 
included in the development and review process and had no recommended changes. The 
guideline and accompanying technical review underwent independent peer review, and a 30-
day open public comment period; all comments were collated by the AGA staff, and were 
reviewed and carefully considered by the guideline panel and technical review teams, 
respectively. Changes were incorporated in revised documents, and where changes were not 
accepted, a thoughtful response document was created.  Following the public comment period, 
two pivotal clinical trials (VARSITY, UNIFI) were published and a critical safety update on 
tofacitinib was issued by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). At the recommendation of 
the Clinical Guidelines Committee, the technical review and clinical guidelines were updated to 
4 
 
incorporate this new evidence as presented here. In accordance with the Clinical Guidelines 
Committee policies, all clinical guidelines are reviewed annually at the AGA Clinical Guideline 
Committee meeting for new information. The next update for these guidelines is anticipated in 
three years from publication. 
 
UC is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease with peak onset in early adulthood.2 
Untreated, the natural history of the disease is one of relapsing and remitting mucosal 
inflammation. Based on population-based cohort studies, the majority of patients with UC have 
a mild to moderate course, generally most active at diagnosis and then in varying periods of 
remission or mild activity. Approximately 15% patients may experience an aggressive course, 
and 20% of these patients may require hospitalization for severe disease activity.3, 4 The 5- and 
10-year cumulative risk of colectomy is 10-15%, primarily limited to patients with moderate to 
severe disease activity; a subset of hospitalized patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis 
(ASUC) have short-term colectomy rates of 25-30%.4 Predictors of an aggressive disease 
course and colectomy are: young age at diagnosis (age < 40 years old), extensive disease, 
severe endoscopic activity (presence of large and/or deep ulcers), presence of extra-intestinal 
manifestations, early need for corticosteroids and elevated inflammatory markers.5 For this 
guideline and the accompanying technical review, moderate to severe UC is defined based on 
the Truelove and Witts criteria and Mayo Clinic score (Table 1).5-7 After excluding concomitant 
infections (such as Clostridium difficile), patients with moderate to severe disease are those who 
are dependent on or refractory to corticosteroids, have severe endoscopic disease activity 
(presence of ulcers), or are at high risk of colectomy. When reported, Mayo Clinic scores of 6-12 
with an endoscopic subscore of 2 or 3 were considered moderate to severe disease. ASUC in 
this guideline is defined as hospitalized patients with the following Truelove and Witts criteria: ≥6 
bloody bowel movements/day with at least one marker of systemic toxicity including heart rate 
>90 beats/minute, temperature >37.80 C, hemoglobin <10.5 g/dl and/or erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate >30 mm/h.7  
5 
 
There are a number of different drug classes for long-term management of moderate to 
severe UC, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists, anti-integrin agent 
(vedolizumab), janus kinase inhibitor (tofacitinib) and immunomodulators (thiopurines, 
methotrexate).8 In general, most drugs that are initiated for induction of remission are continued 
as maintenance therapy, if they are effective. This clinical practice is considered standard of 
care in this guideline and it is assumed that if a drug (excluding corticosteroids and 
cyclosporine) is started for and is effective for induction of remission or response, it will be 
continued for maintenance of remission.  
 
This guideline addresses the medical management of adult outpatients with moderate to 
severe UC as well as the medical management of adult hospitalized patients with ASUC. The 
guideline focuses on immunomodulators, biologics, and small molecules for induction and 
maintenance of remission (for moderate to severe UC) and decreasing the risk of colectomy (for 
ASUC). As noted above, unless otherwise specified, we do not present separate 
recommendations for induction and maintenance of remission. The drugs are listed in order of 
FDA approval unless specifically mentioned. The first seven questions are focused on the 
medical management of adult outpatients with moderate to severe UC; the subsequent four 
questions are focused on adult patients hospitalized with ASUC, focusing on initial 
management, and rescue therapy in cases of corticosteroid-refractory disease. We 
acknowledge challenges in defining moderate disease activity and severity, with variable 
definition in clinical practice, and an understanding of this entity may be enhanced reading the 
AGA guideline on the management of mild to moderate UC.9 This guideline does not address 
surgical management of moderate to severe UC or ASUC. Therapeutic drug monitoring to guide 
the use of biologic therapy has been addressed in separate AGA guidelines.10 The guideline is 
intended for the use of gastroenterology providers, primary care providers, surgeons, patients 
and policymakers. 
6 
 
 
For this guideline, critical outcomes for decision-making for adults with moderate to 
severe UC were induction and maintenance of remission, and for hospitalized adults with ASUC 
was short-term colectomy risk (within 3 months of hospitalization), and are reported in the 
evidence profiles. Important outcomes of interest were induction and maintenance of 
endoscopic remission, maintenance of corticosteroid-free remission, serious adverse events 
(including serious infections and malignancy), and treatment tolerability (drug discontinuation 
due to adverse events). These were considered in evidence synthesis especially if inadequate 
or conflicting data was observed for critical outcomes. Safety considerations with these 
medications have been synthesized in the accompanying technical review. In the 
recommendations presented in this guideline, estimates of effects of different medications are 
presented as the risk for failure to induce or maintain remission, i.e., a relative risk (RR) or odds 
ratio (OR) <1 suggests that the drug under consideration is more effective than the comparison 
drug or placebo for induction or maintenance of remission.  
 
This guideline was developed using a process described elsewhere.11 Briefly, the AGA 
process for developing clinical practice guidelines incorporate GRADE methodology 12 and best 
practices as outlined by the Institute of Medicine.13 GRADE methodology was used to prepare 
the background information for the guideline and the accompanying technical review. Optimal 
understanding of the guideline will be enhanced by reading the applicable portions of the 
technical review.  The guideline panel and the authors of the technical review met face to face 
on December 14, 2018 to discuss the findings from the technical review. The guideline authors 
subsequently formulated the guideline recommendations using the GRADE evidence-to-
decision framework guidance. New evidence was presented to the guideline panel by the 
technical review team on October 16, 2019, and was reviewed and approved in a virtual face-to-
face meeting on November 1, 2019. Although the quality of evidence (Table 2) was a key factor 
in determining the strength of the recommendations (Table 3), the panel also considered the 
balance between benefit and harm of interventions, patients’ values and preferences, and 
7 
 
overall resource utilization. The recommendations, quality of evidence, and strength of 
recommendations are summarized in Table 4.  
 
 
8 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA recommends 
using infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab, tofacitinib or ustekinumab over 
no treatment. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence) 
The panel recommends treating adult outpatients with moderate-severe UC with infliximab, 
adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab, tofacitinib or ustekinumab over no treatment for the 
induction and maintenance of remission. There were 16 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
comparing the TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab, tofacitinib and ustekinumab to placebo (see 
technical review). Induction of remission was assessed at 6-8 weeks and maintenance of 
remission was evaluated at 30-54 weeks. All active interventions were superior to placebo for 
induction of remission, regardless of prior biologic exposure (infliximab: RR, 2.85; 95% CI, 2.11-
3.86; adalimumab: RR, 1.62; 95% CI, 1.15-2.29; golimumab RR, 2.49; 95% CI, 1.58-3.93; 
vedolizumab RR, 2.22; 95% CI, 1.36-3.64; tofactinib RR, 3.22; 95% CI, 2.03-5.08; ustekinumab 
RR, 2.91; 95% CI, 1.72-4.94). Likewise, all active interventions were superior to placebo for 
maintenance of remission (infliximab: RR, 2.25; 95% CI, 1.67-3.05; adalimumab: RR, 2.28; 95% 
CI, 1.52-3.42; golimumab RR, 1.88; 95% CI, 1.32-2.68; vedolizumab RR, 2.31; 95% CI, 1.63-
3.28; tofactinib 5mg twice daily RR, 3.09; 95% CI, 1.99-4.79; ustekinumab RR, 1.83; 95% CI, 
1.33-2.49). All medications were well-tolerated with low rates of serious adverse events in both 
trials of induction and maintenance therapy, not significantly different from placebo. Importantly, 
the recommended induction dose of tofacitinib is 10mg twice daily for 8 weeks; in select cases 
with modest response to initial 8 week therapy, high dose tofacitinib may considered for total 16 
weeks. For long-term maintenance, tofacitinib 5mg twice daily is recommended for most 
patients; a higher dose may be considered in patients who lose response at 5mg twice daily 
dose after careful of risks and benefits of the medication. At higher doses, an unexpected 
increase in risk of pulmonary embolism and all-cause mortality has been observed. 
9 
 
 
The overall quality of evidence for this recommendation was moderate for both induction 
and maintenance of remission. While majority of the studies were registration trials sponsored 
by industry, there was no important bias, inconsistency or indirectness. The evidence was rated 
down for imprecision due to the lower number of events (< 200) for all comparisons, failing to 
achieve the optimal information size. 
 
2a. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who are naïve to biologic 
agents, the AGA suggests using infliximab or vedolizumab rather than adalimumab, for 
induction of remission. (Conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence) 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
convenience of self-administered subcutaneous injection, and a lower value on the relative 
efficacy of medications, may reasonably chose adalimumab as an alternative. 
2b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who are naïve to biologic 
agents, the AGA recommends that tofacitinib only be used in the setting of a clinical or 
registry study. (No recommendation, knowledge gap) Comment: Updated FDA 
recommendations (07/26/2019) on indications for use of tofacitinib in ulcerative colitis 
recommends its use only after failure of, or intolerance to TNFα antagonists. 
In adult outpatients with moderate-severe UC naïve to biologic agents, the guideline panel 
suggests using infliximab or vedolizumab, rather than adalimumab for induction of remission. 
Based on updated FDA document on approved indication for tofacitinib use only in patients after 
failure of, or intolerance to TNFα antagonists, the guideline panel recommends that any use of 
tofacitinib in biologic-naïve patients with UC be closely monitored in the setting of a clinical or 
registry study. Currently, both infliximab and vedolizumab are intravenous medications that 
require infusions, which may be inconvenient to some patients. For these patients, particularly 
10 
 
those with less severe disease, who value the convenience of self-administered injection 
therapy, adalimumab may be a reasonable alternative option as first-line biologic therapy.  
In the head-to-head trials comparing vedolizumab vs. adalimumab in patients with 
moderate-severe UC (VARSITY), rate of clinical remission was significantly higher in 
vedolizumab-treated patients vs. adalimumab-treated patients (34.2% vs. 24.3%; RR, 1.41; 95% 
CI, 1.10-1.81) amongst biologic-naïve patients. For all other comparisons, evidence on 
comparative efficacy was derived from a network meta-analysis. Network meta-analysis can 
help assess comparative efficacy of several interventions and synthesize evidence across a 
network of RCTs, especially if there is weak (or absent) direct evidence.14 Such indirect 
comparisons of competing interventions, adjusted by a common control, such as placebo, can 
partially take account of prognostic characteristics of patients in different trials. The analysis 
included 15 RCTs with a total of 3747 biologic-naïve patients with moderate-severe UC, treated 
with infliximab (4 trials, 667 patients), adalimumab (4 trials, 1046 patients), golimumab (2 trials, 
586 patients), vedolizumab (3 trials, 630 patients), tofacitinib (2 trials, 520 patients) and 
ustekinumab (1 trial, 298 patients) were included (see technical review). For this body of 
evidence for induction therapy, trial design, participant characteristics, interventions, 
comparators and outcomes for trials of infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab and 
ustekinumab were deemed reasonably similar to facilitate indirect comparison. In contrast, trials 
of tofacitinib were deemed dissimilar since they used a strict rectal bleeding score of zero for 
outcome assessment (in contrast to other trials which allowed rectal bleeding score of 0 or 1 in 
outcome assessment). See the technical review and technical review tables 3-5 for full details 
regarding this analysis. On network meta-analysis, there was moderate confidence in estimates 
demonstrating the superiority of infliximab over adalimumab (OR, 2.10; 95% CI, 1.16-3.79) 
(evidence rated down for serious imprecision). It is important to note that in these clinical trials, 
treatment was not optimized to suggested drug concentrations; it is possible that the efficacy of 
11 
 
infliximab, adalimumab and golimumab may be comparable in patients who achieve adequate 
drug concentrations given their similar mechanism of action.  
2c. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who have previously been 
exposed to infliximab, particularly those with primary non-response, the AGA suggests 
using ustekinumab or tofacitinib, rather than vedolizumab or adalimumab for induction 
of remission. (Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence) 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
potential safety of medications, and a lower value on the relative efficacy of medications, may 
reasonably chose vedolizumab as an alternative. 
In adult outpatients with moderate-severe UC who have previously been exposed to infliximab, 
especially those with primary non-response, the guideline panel suggests using ustekinumab or 
tofacitinib rather than vedolizumab or adalimumab for induction of remission.  
In the VARSITY trial, ~21% patients had received prior treatment with a TNFα antagonist 
other than adalimumab. In these patients, there was no significant differences in rates of 
achieving clinical remission at week 52 (20.3% vs. 16.0%), and the overall body of evidence 
was deemed to be low quality (rated down for very serious imprecision). A separate network 
meta-analysis was also performed comparing trials of different agents in patients with moderate-
severe UC, who had previously been exposed to TNFα antagonists. The network meta-analysis 
included 7 RCTs with 1580 patients with prior exposure to TNFα antagonists. Infliximab and 
golimumab were excluded, since the published studies only included biologic-naïve patients 
(see technical review Table 5). Of note, all these comparisons were rated down for intransitivity. 
Prior treatment exposure and response is an important effect modifier. Study level estimates did 
not report what proportion of patients had exposure to more than one TNFα antagonist and 
whether patients had exposure to multiple different classes of biologics. There was low 
confidence in estimates supporting higher efficacy of tofacitinib and ustekinumab over 
12 
 
adalimumab (tofacitinib vs. adalimumab: OR, 11.05; 95% CI, 1.79-68.41; ustekinumab vs. 
adalimumab: OR, 10.71; 95% CI, 2.01-57.20), and over vedolizumab (tofacitinib vs. 
vedolizumab: OR, 6.18; 95% CI, 1.00-38.00); ustekinumab vs. vedolizumab: OR, 5.99; 95% CI, 
1.13-31.76) for induction of clinical remission in patients with prior exposure to TNFα 
antagonists. 
The guideline panel was explicit in stating these conditional recommendations apply only 
for patients with prior exposure to infliximab. Given prior evidence supporting superiority of 
infliximab over adalimumab or golimumab in biologic-naive patients with moderate-severe UC 
and lack of direct evidence in adalimumab- or golimumab-exposed patients, benefit of switching 
to vedolizumab, ustekinumab or tofacitinib over infliximab, in patients with prior exposure to 
adalimumab or golimumab, is uncertain. As noted in AGA’s therapeutic drug monitoring 
guidelines, switching out of class may be reasonable in case of lack of response despite 
achieving adequate drug concentration.10 
Data for maintenance of remission could not be reliably synthesized using network meta-
analysis due to significant differences in clinical trial designs – trials of infliximab and 
adalimumab were treat-straight through trials, whereas maintenance trials of golimumab, 
vedolizumab, tofacitinib and ustekinumab re-randomized responders to induction therapy – and 
lack of stratification of data by prior biologic exposure. However, as with standard clinical 
practice, once a drug is initiated for induction of remission, if effective, it is typically continued for 
maintenance of remission as well.    
 
3a. In adult outpatients with active moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
against using thiopurine monotherapy for INDUCTION of remission.  (Conditional 
recommendation, very low quality of evidence) 
13 
 
3b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis in remission, the AGA 
suggests using thiopurine monotherapy, rather than no treatment, for MAINTENANCE of 
remission. (Conditional recommendation low quality of evidence) 
The panel suggests against using thiopurine monotherapy for induction of remission in adult 
outpatients with active moderate-severe UC. However, in patients who have achieved remission 
(typically induced with corticosteroids), the panel suggests using thiopurine monotherapy rather 
than no treatment for maintenance of remission.  
There were three trials comparing thiopurines vs. placebo and two trials comparing 
thiopurines vs. 5-aminosalycilates (5-ASA) for inducing corticosteroid free remission.16-20 In four 
out of five trials, patients were considered corticosteroid-dependent, unable to taper 
corticosteroids below 10-20mg/day without relapsing. In contrast to modern clinical trials, 
different disease activity indices were used in these studies, outcome of corticosteroid-free 
remission was assessed at variable intervals from 4 weeks to 52 weeks, and in patients with 
active disease started simultaneously on thiopurines and corticosteroids, it was unclear whether 
remission was induced by corticosteroids or thiopurines. Although thiopurines were associated 
with a higher rate of corticosteroid-free clinical remission compared to placebo or 5-ASA (RR, 
1.25; 95% CI, 1.01-1.56), the overall quality of evidence was deemed very low due to serious 
risk of bias, imprecision, and indirectness (outcome definition and assessment). Based on the 
slow onset of action of thiopurines, they are unlikely to be effective as monotherapy for induction 
of remission in patients with active disease, in the absence of corticosteroids. Hence, based on 
uncertainty of evidence, the guideline panel opted to suggest against the use of thiopurines for 
induction of clinical remission in patients with active moderate-severe UC.  
For maintenance of remission, four trials comparing thiopurines vs. placebo and three 
trials comparing thiopurines vs. 5-ASA were included.17, 18, 20-24 Maintenance of remission was 
defined as prevention of relapse following corticosteroid-induced remission (5 trials) or as the 
14 
 
ability to maintain a corticosteroid-free remission in patients on long-standing thiopurine therapy 
(2 trials), evaluated between 6-18 months. On meta-analysis, thiopurines were more effective 
than placebo or 5-ASA for prevention of disease relapse (RR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.49-0.77) among 
patients with inactive UC (in remission). Quality of evidence was rated as low due to risk of bias 
and imprecision.  
 
3c. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
against using methotrexate monotherapy, for induction or maintenance of remission. 
(Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence) 
The guideline panel suggests against the use of methotrexate monotherapy for induction or 
maintenance of remission for adult outpatients with moderate-severe UC.  
Two trials compared methotrexate vs. placebo and one trial compared methotrexate vs. 
5-ASA for induction of remission.25, 26 In the pivotal METEOR trial, all patients were on 10-
40mg/day of corticosteroids with or without active disease.25 The primary outcome was 
corticosteroid-free remission between weeks 12-30. On meta-analysis, there was no significant 
difference in rates of inducing remission with methotrexate compared to placebo (RR, 1.31; 95% 
CI, 0.89-1.94). The quality of evidence was rated as very low due to very serious indirectness 
(different dosing regimens and modes of administration, variable definition of clinical remission, 
and inability to truly assess whether remission was induced by corticosteroids or methotrexate), 
and serious imprecision. For maintenance of remission, two trials compared methotrexate vs. 
placebo and one compared methotrexate vs. 5-ASA.18, 25, 26 Similar to induction, there was no 
difference between methotrexate and placebo/5-ASA for maintenance of remission (RR, 1.01; 
95% CI, 0.79-1.29). The quality of evidence was rated as very low due to serious indirectness, 
and very serious imprecision. 
15 
 
 
 
 
4a. In adult outpatients with active moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
using biologic monotherapy (TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab, ustekinumab) rather than 
thiopurine monotherapy for INDUCTION of remission. (Conditional recommendation, low 
quality evidence) 
4b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis in remission, the AGA 
makes no recommendation in favor of, or against, using biologic monotherapy (TNFα 
antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab), rather than thiopurine monotherapy for 
MAINTENANCE of remission. (No recommendation, knowledge gap) 
The panel conditionally suggests use of biologic monotherapy rather than thiopurine for 
induction of remission. The panel makes no recommendation in favor of or against using 
biologic monotherapy over thiopurine monotherapy for maintenance of remission. 
Evidence was informed by a three-arm clinical trial, UC-SUCCESS comparing infliximab 
vs. azathioprine vs. combination therapy of infliximab with azathioprine,27 as well as indirect 
evidence based on trials comparing individual medications with placebo. While UC-SUCCESS 
was designed as an induction and maintenance trial to evaluate the comparative efficacy of 
monotherapy vs. combination therapy in biologic-naïve adult outpatients with moderate-severe 
UC (similar to SONIC for Crohn’s disease), the trial was discontinued prematurely by the 
sponsor before intended enrollment and without completion of the maintenance phase.27 In this 
trial, there was no difference between infliximab monotherapy and azathioprine monotherapy for 
achieving corticosteroid-free remission at week 16 (RR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.53-1.72), albeit based 
on very low quality evidence. Infliximab monotherapy was superior to thiopurine monotherapy 
16 
 
for achieving endoscopic remission, an important outcome. In addition, based on prior evidence 
synthesis from PICOs 1 and 3 and corresponding recommendations, AGA recommends using 
biologic agents (TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab) over placebo (moderate 
quality evidence), whereas it suggests against using thiopurine monotherapy, for induction of 
remission (very low quality evidence) in adult outpatients with moderate-severe UC.  
Since UC-SUCCESS was terminated prematurely,27 no head-to-head trials informed 
comparative efficacy of biologic monotherapy vs. thiopurines for maintenance of remission. As 
in PICOs 1 and 3, both strategies have been recommended for maintenance of remission, over 
no treatment. Recognizing lack of evidence, the panel makes no recommendation in favor of or 
against biologic monotherapy rather than thiopurine monotherapy, for maintenance of 
remission. Physician judgment factoring in patients’ clinical status, safety profile of different 
agents and costs and convenience of therapy may be used to inform choice of agents. 
 
5a. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
combining TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab with thiopurines or 
methotrexate, rather than biologic monotherapy.  (Conditional recommendation, low quality 
evidence) 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on 
lower risk of adverse events with biologic monotherapy, and lower value on the relative efficacy 
of combination therapy, may reasonably chose biologic monotherapy.  
5b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
combining TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab with thiopurines or 
methotrexate, rather than thiopurine monotherapy. (Conditional recommendation, low 
quality evidence) 
17 
 
The guideline panel suggests combining TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab with 
thiopurines or methotrexate over biologic monotherapy, or thiopurine monotherapy, in adult 
outpatients with moderate-severe UC. However, in patients particularly those with less severe 
disease who place higher value on safety and tolerability of pharmacotherapy may reasonably 
chose biologic monotherapy.  
Combination therapy of infliximab with thiopurine compared to infliximab monotherapy 
was evaluated in UC-SUCCESS, a single three-arm double blind double dummy RCT in 
biologic-naïve patients with.27 As noted above, this trial was terminated prematurely before 
planned enrollment and prior to completion of maintenance trial. Patients were randomized to 
infliximab monotherapy, azathioprine monotherapy, or combined infliximab and azathioprine 
therapy.27 Combination therapy was more effective for inducing a corticosteroid-free remission 
at week 16 compared to infliximab monotherapy (RR, 1.78; 95% CI, 1.08-1.94). No trials 
compared combination therapy of other TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab with 
immunomodulators vs. biologic monotherapy. Since adding immunomodulators to biologic 
agents improves pharmacokinetics of the biologic agent (increasing trough concentration and 
decreasing immunogenicity), the guideline panel extrapolated this indirect evidence favoring 
combination therapy of thiopurines and infliximab to other TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or 
ustekinumab, particularly in patients with unfavorable pharmacokinetics (more severe disease, 
higher inflammatory burden, low albumin, higher body mass index), even though the 
immunogenicity of newer biologic agents may be lower than infliximab.28 Evidence supporting 
the use of combination therapy vs. immunomodulator monotherapy is also based on UC-
SUCCESS.27 In this trial, combination of infliximab and thiopurines was superior to thiopurine 
monotherapy for achieving corticosteroid-free remission at week 16 (RR, 1.70; 95% CI, 1.04-
2.78).  
18 
 
 
No clinical trial comparing combination therapy with monotherapy for maintenance of 
remission was identified. Very low quality evidence from a retrospective French study of 82 
patients in remission on combination therapy, suggested that continuing combination infliximab 
and azathioprine was superior to de-escalating to infliximab monotherapy.  
 
Overall, quality of evidence for infliximab-based combination therapy vs. infliximab 
monotherapy and vs. thiopurine monotherapy for induction of remission was rated as moderate 
quality (rated down for imprecision). No trials comparing combination therapy of non-infliximab 
TNFα antagonists (adalimumab, golimumab), vedolizumab or ustekinumab with thiopurines (or 
methotrexate) vs. biologic monotherapy were identified. Extrapolating from evidence supporting 
the use of combination of therapy with infliximab, acknowledging lower risk of immunogenicity 
with newer biologic agents, evidence of other agents was rated as low quality, due to 
indirectness. Quality of evidence for maintenance of remission was rated as very low due to the 
observational evidence and serious imprecision.  
 
6. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests early 
use of biologic agents with or without immunomodulator therapy, rather than gradual 
step up after failure of 5-aminosalicylates. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality 
evidence) 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
safety of 5-ASA therapy, and lower value on the efficacy of biologic agents, may reasonably 
choose gradual step therapy with 5-ASA therapy.  
The guideline panel suggests early use of biologics with or without immunomodulator therapy, 
or tofacitinib rather than gradual step up therapy after failure of 5-aminosalysilates (5-ASA), in 
patients with moderate-severe disease activity at high risk of colectomy. However, in patients 
19 
 
with less severe disease who place higher value on the safety profile of 5-ASA therapy and 
lower value on the overall efficacy of biologics may choose to start with 5-ASA therapy.  
There were no studies identified that compared a strategy of upfront biologic-based 
therapy or tofacitinib vs. gradual step-up therapy (introducing biologic-based therapy or 
tofacitinib only after failure of 5-ASA), or that compared biologic-based therapy vs. 5-ASA-based 
therapy, in patients with moderate-severe UC at high risk of colectomy. Three studies compared 
thiopurines vs. 5-ASA, in corticosteroid-exposed patients with UC.18, 21, 24 On meta-analysis, 
thiopurines achieved higher rates of corticosteroid-free remission than 5-ASA. Indirectly 
extrapolating the data from PICO questions 3 and 4, suggests that biologic-based therapy will 
likely be more effective than 5-ASA-based therapy. Importantly, 5-ASAs have not been 
specifically studied in patients with moderate-severe disease activity, and their use is limited to 
patients with mild-moderate disease activity. Delaying effective treatment to induce remission in 
patients with moderate-severe UC at high risk of colectomy may be harmful due to ongoing 
untreated active disease, increasing risk of UC-related complications, hospitalization, colectomy 
and overall inferior quality of life.  
The overall quality of evidence supporting this recommendation was rated as very low 
due to serious indirectness and imprecision.  
 
7. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who have achieved 
remission with biologic agents and/or immunomodulators, or tofacitinib, the AGA 
suggests against continuing 5-aminosalicylates for induction and maintenance of 
remission. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence) 
20 
 
The guideline panel suggests against continuation of 5-ASA in adult outpatients with moderate-
severe UC for induction and maintenance of remission, who have previously failed 5-ASA and 
have been escalated to a biologic agent and/or immunomodulators or tofacitinib.  
In a randomized clinical trial, patients with moderate-severe UC in corticosteroid-free 
clinical, endoscopic and histologic remission on azathioprine and olsalazine, were randomized 
to either continuation of azathioprine with olsalazine or de-escalation to azathioprine alone. In 
two years of follow up, there were no differences in risk of relapse between the two groups (RR, 
1.02; 95% CI, 0.77-1.34). There were no studies of systematic withdrawal of 5-ASA in biologic- 
or tofacitinib-treated patients with moderate-severe UC. Indirect evidence from sub-group 
analysis of RCTs comparing rates of induction and maintenance of remission in patients who 
were vs. were not concomitantly on 5-ASA at trial entry was used. On meta-analysis, there was 
no differences in rates of inducing or maintaining clinical remission in TNFα antagonist- or 
tofacitinib-treated patients who were vs. were not on concomitant 5-ASA at trial entry (Induction: 
RR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.74-1.18l maintenance: RR, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.78-1.09). Of note, these trials 
did not assess effect of systematic withdrawal of 5-ASAs in biologic- or tofacitinib-treated 
patients. Overall quality of evidence was rated as low due to imprecision and indirectness of 
evidence.  
This recommendation did not factor in whether continuing 5-ASAs may or may not have 
a chemoprotective benefit against colorectal cancer in patients with UC. While studies have 
variably shown an association between 5-ASA use and lower risk of colorectal cancer in 
patients with UC,29, 30 recent data suggests that chronically active disease is a risk factor for 
colon cancer and that sustained remission is protective regardless of the type of therapy used.31  
21 
 
MANAGEMENT OF HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS WITH ACUTE SEVERE ULCERATIVE 
COLITIS 
 
8. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
using intravenous methylprednisolone dose equivalent of 40 to 60mg/d rather than 
higher dose intravenous corticosteroids. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality 
evidence) 
The guideline panel suggests using intravenous corticosteroids at doses equivalent to 40-
60mg/day of methylprednisolone rather than higher doses of intravenous corticosteroids to 
decrease risk of colectomy in hospitalized adults with ASUC.  
Intravenous corticosteroids are the mainstay of management of hospitalized adults with 
ASUC. There were no head-to-head trials comparing different doses of corticosteroids in 
hospitalized patients with ASUC. In a systematic review evaluating the risk factors for colectomy 
in patients with ASUC, Turner and colleagues observed that mean methylprednisolone dose 
was 68mg/day (range 40-100mg) in hospitalized patients with ASUC; on meta-regression after 
controlling for baseline disease severity, there was no correlation between corticosteroid dose 
and risk of colectomy (R2<0.01).32 In included trials, different intravenous corticosteroid 
regimens (different formulations, given once daily vs. multiple times daily vs. as continuous 
infusion) were used, and none was superior to others. Based on models estimating risk and risk 
factors for colectomy in patients with ASUC, corticosteroid trials of 3-5 days are suggested; 
continued use of corticosteroids beyond 7 days has not been shown to be effective in non-
responding patients.32, 33  
Overall quality of evidence was rated as very low due to observational nature of 
evidence and indirectness in approach to comparing efficacy.  
 
22 
 
9. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis without infections, the 
AGA suggests against adjunctive antibiotics. (conditional recommendation, very low quality 
of evidence) 
The guideline panel suggests against the routine use of adjunctive antibiotics for the treatment 
of ASUC in patients without gastrointestinal or extra-intestinal infections.  
Four RCTs comparing antibiotics vs. no antibiotics/placebo for the treatment of ASUC 
were identified.34-37 Different antibiotics were used, with durations ranging from 5-10 days. On 
meta-analysis, the addition of antibiotics was not superior to no antibiotics for decreasing short-
term risk of colectomy in patients with ASUC (RR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.46-1.35). After exclusion of 
one trial of oral vancomycin which was positive but used an insensitive test to exclude 
concomitant Clostridium difficile infection, overall summary estimate for adjunctive antibiotics 
was close to unity (RR, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.55-1.64). 
The quality of evidence was rated very low due to serious risk of bias, serious 
imprecision and inconsistency given the diverse group of antibiotics used in the studies.  
   
10. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis refractory to 
intravenous corticosteroids, the AGA suggests using infliximab or cyclosporine. 
(Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence) 
The guideline panel suggests using either infliximab or cyclosporine in hospitalized adult 
patients with ASUC refractory to a 3-5 day trial of intravenous corticosteroids.  
One RCT compared infliximab to placebo in 45 patients with ASUC refractory to 
intravenous corticosteroids.38 In this trial, infliximab was superior to placebo in decreasing the 
risk of colectomy within 90 days of hospitalization (RR, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.22-0.87). Patients were 
given a single dose of 5mg/kg infliximab without further induction or maintenance doses. 
23 
 
Likewise, intravenous cyclosporine (4mg/kg) was compared to placebo in a single small RCT in 
corticosteroid-refractory patients with ASUC.39 In this trial, there was a trend favoring 
cyclosporine over placebo (RR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.18-2.01). In a subsequent RCT, cyclosporine 
dose 2mg/kg/day was comparable to 4mg/kg/day, with conceivably a superior safety profile with 
lower dose.40 In two head-to-head trials comparing infliximab vs. cyclosporine, there was no 
significant difference in short-term risk of colectomy between standard dose induction therapy 
with infliximab vs. cyclosporine in hospitalized patients with corticosteroid-refractory ASUC (RR, 
1.00; 95% CI, 0.72-1.40). 41, 42 Long-term follow-up of these trials also suggest similar findings. 
Over a median follow-up of 4.5 years of participants in the CYSIF trial, 1- and 5- year colectomy 
free survival was 70.9% and 61.5% in patients treated with cyclosporine initially and 69.1% and 
65.1%, respectively, in patients randomized to infliximab (p=0.97). Importantly, in these trials, 
randomized treatment was offered for 12-14 weeks, after which treatment decisions were 
deferred to treating physicians. After the initial randomization period, 1- and 5-year cumulative 
use of infliximab in cyclosporine-treated patients was 45.7% and 57.1%, respectively; in 
contrast, only 4 infliximab-treated patients switched to cyclosporine.41, 42 
Overall quality of evidence supporting the use of infliximab or cyclosporine over placebo 
for ASUC refractory to intravenous corticosteroids was rated as moderate quality (imprecision) 
or low quality (very serious imprecision), respectively. Evidence supporting the comparability of 
infliximab and cyclosporine decreasing risk of short-term colectomy in hospitalized patients with 
corticosteroid-refractory ASUC was rated as low quality (open-label trials with high risk of bias, 
and imprecision). 
 
 
 
24 
 
11. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis, refractory to 
intravenous corticosteroids, being treated with infliximab, the AGA makes no 
recommendation on routine use of intensive vs. standard infliximab dosing. (No 
recommendation, knowledge gap) 
The guideline panel makes no recommendation regarding routine use of intensive vs. standard 
infliximab dosing in adult patients hospitalized with ASUC refractory to intravenous 
corticosteroids.  
There were no RCTs comparing different dosing regimens in patients hospitalized with 
ASUC. Five observational studies compared outcomes in patients hospitalized with ASUC 
refractory to intravenous corticosteroids, being treated with different infliximab regimens.43-46 
Intensive dosing regimens included either shortened interval between the infliximab dosing (<2 
weeks, dose stacking) and/or induction with higher dose infliximab (10mg/kg) either upfront or at 
time of dose stacking, without a standard protocol. On meta-analysis of these observational 
studies, there was no significant difference in the short-term risk of colectomy intensive vs. 
standard infliximab dosing regimens (RR 1.61; 95% CI, 0.74-3.52). In two studies, upfront 
induction with higher dose infliximab (10mg/kg) was superior to dose stacking with standard 
doses (5mg/kg), with lower risk of colectomy (RR, 0.24; 95% CI, 0.08-0.68). Overall, quality of 
evidence was rated as very low quality due to serious risk of bias, inconsistency and 
imprecision.  
Biologically, patients with corticosteroid-refractory ASUC have a high inflammatory 
burden that may result in accelerated consumption and fecal wasting of infliximab resulting in 
low serum concentrations and immunogenicity.47 Additionally, given that the drug is albumin 
bound and many of these patients are malnourished in the setting of ASUC, the systemic drug 
concentration of biologics may be lower. Hence, it is plausible that intensive regimens may be 
more effective than standard induction with infliximab. However, this entire body of 
25 
 
observational evidence is confounded by disease severity, wherein patients at intrinsically 
higher risk of colectomy, or those who have inadequate response to standard induction dose, 
are treated with more intensive regimens. As a result, given the lack of robust evidence in this 
setting to guide therapy, this remains a knowledge gap in need of further research to better 
guide therapy for the ideal induction regimens for infliximab in hospitalized patients with ASUC 
refractory to intravenous corticosteroids. 
 
SUMMARY 
These practice recommendations for the management of moderate-to-severe UC were 
developed using the GRADE framework and in adherence to the standards established by the 
Institute of Medicine for the development of trustworthy guidelines12, 13. The goal of this guideline 
is to promote high quality, high value evidence-based care for patients with moderate-to-severe 
UC.  
 
Current evidence supports use of infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab, and 
tofacitinib for the induction and maintenance of remission in moderate-severe UC. Thiopurine 
monotherapy should not be used for induction of remission but may be considered for 
maintenance of remission; in contrast, methotrexate monotherapy, orally or subcutaneously, 
should not be used for induction or maintenance of remission. Network meta-analysis suggests 
that infliximab and vedolizumab may be preferred first-line therapy in biologic-naïve patients, 
rather than standard-dose adalimumab or golimumab, with limited evidence to inform 
appropriate positioning of tofacitinib. In patients with prior exposure to infliximab, particularly 
those with primary non-response to induction therapy, vedolizumab or tofacitinib may be 
preferred over adalimumab or golimumab. Combination therapy of a biologic agent with an 
immunomodulator is more effective than monotherapy with either agent, though patients, 
particularly those with less severe disease and those averse to side effects from medications, 
26 
 
may opt for monotherapy. In patients with moderate-severe disease activity, at high risk of 
colectomy, biologic agents with or without an immunomodulator, or tofacitinib, should be used 
early rather than gradual step up therapy after failure of 5-aminosalicylates. Patients in 
remission with biologic agents and/or immunomodulators or tofacitinib after prior failure of 5-
ASA, may discontinue 5-aminosalicylates.  
Among hospitalized patients with ASUC, after excluding alternative etiologies, 
intravenous methylprednisolone doses of 40-60mg/day or equivalent are mainstay of therapy. 
Routine use of adjunctive antibiotics in patients without infections is not recommended. Patients 
who are refractory to 3-5 days trial of intravenous corticosteroids, who prefer ongoing medical 
management, may be treated with either infliximab or cyclosporine. In patients being treated 
with infliximab, no recommendation can be made regarding routine use of intensive vs. standard 
infliximab dosing.  
 
AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 
The guideline panel identified multiple knowledge gaps and areas for future research in 
patients with moderate-severe UC. With the increasing number of different drug classes 
available to treat UC, there is a clear need for identifying biomarkers predictive of response to 
individual therapies, to facilitate optimal positioning of therapies; in addition, head-to-head trials 
will directly inform comparative efficacy, and strengthen quality of evidence derived from 
network meta-analyses. Besides efficacy, safety is an important consideration with different 
therapies, and different treatment strategies offer distinct risk-benefit profiles. A comprehensive 
personalization of therapy based on key treatment attributes (efficacy, safety, speed of onset of 
action, co-interventions, convenience) is warranted to optimally inform shared-decision making. 
There is limited evidence regarding the utility and duration of combination therapy of biologics 
and immunomodulators in patients with UC, particularly with newer agents with lower 
27 
 
immunogenicity and with better optimization of biologic agents through therapeutic drug 
monitoring. Treatment targets with UC are in evolution. It is unclear how well targeting an 
integrated clinical and biomarker remission compares to endoscopic remission, and whether 
there may be incremental benefit to treating to a target of histologic remission. Finally, there is 
considerable paucity of evidence on optimally using existing therapies and novel treatment 
options for hospitalized patients with ASUC who are refractory to intravenous corticosteroids. 
The management of these patients, at very high-risk of colectomy in the short-term, also need to 
be prioritized.  
 
 
 
28 
 
Table 1. Disease severity scoring systems 
Truelove and Witts Criteria
 
Mild
Severe
Fulminant
Stool 
number/day 
<4 
>6 
>10 
Blood in stool 
Intermittent 
Frequent 
Continuous 
Temperature 
0C 
Normal 
>37.5 
>37.5 
Pulse 
beats/minute 
Normal 
>90 
>90 
Hemoglobin 
Normal 
<75% normal
Transfusion required 
Erythrocyte 
sedimentation 
rate mm/hour 
≤30 
>30 
>30 
Colonic 
features on 
radiograph 
None 
Air, 
edematous 
wall, 
thumbprinting
Colonic dilation 
Clinical signs 
None 
Abdominal 
tenderness 
Abdominal distention and tenderness 
Mayo Score for Ulcerative Colitis 
Variable
Definition
Score
Variable
Definition
Score
Stool pattern 
Normal number 
of daily bowel 
movements 
0 points 
Endoscopic 
findings 
Normal/inactive 
colitis 
0 points 
1 to 2 more 
bowel 
movements than 
normal 
1 point 
Erythema, 
decreased 
vascularity  
1 point 
3 to 4 more 
bowel 
movements than 
normal 
2 points 
Friability, marked 
erythema, 
erosions 
2 points 
5 or more bowel 
movements than 
normal 
3 points 
Ulcerations, 
severe friability, 
spontaneous 
bleeding 
3 points 
Most severe 
rectal bleeding 
of the day 
None 
0 points 
Physician 
global 
assessment 
Normal 
0 points 
Blood streaks 
seen in the stool 
< ½ the time 
1 point 
Mild colitis 
1 point 
Blood in most 
stool 
2 points 
Moderate colitis 
2 points 
Pure blood 
passed 
3 points 
Severe colitis 
3 points 
 
 
29 
 
Table 2. GRADE definitions of quality and certainty of the evidence 
 
Quality Grade
Definition
High
We are very confident that the true effect lies close to the 
estimate of the effect 
Moderate
We are moderately confident in the effect estimate. The true 
effect is likely to be close to the estimate of effect, but there is a 
possibility that it is substantially different. 
Low
Our confidence in the estimate is limited. The true effect may be 
substantially different from the estimate of effect. 
Very low
We have very little confidence in the effect estimate. The true 
effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of 
effect 
Evidence gap
Available evidence is insufficient to determine true effect 
 
 
30 
 
Table 3. GRADE definitions on strength of recommendation and guide to interpretation 
 
Strength of 
recommendation 
Wording in the 
guideline 
For the patient
For the clinician
Strong 
“The AGA 
recommends…” 
Most individuals in 
this situation would 
want the 
recommended 
course and only a 
small proportion 
would not. 
Most individuals 
should receive the 
recommended 
course of action. 
Formal decision aids 
are not likely to be 
needed to help 
individuals make 
decisions consistent 
with their values and 
preferences. 
Conditional 
“The AGA 
suggests…” 
The majority of 
individuals in this 
situation would want 
the suggested 
course, but many 
would not. 
Different choices 
would be appropriate 
for different patients. 
Decision aids may be 
useful in helping 
individuals in making 
decisions consistent 
with their values and 
preferences. 
Clinicians should 
expect to spend more 
time with patients 
when working 
towards a decision. 
No recommendation 
“The AGA makes no 
recommendation…” 
 
The confidence in the 
effect estimate is so 
low that any effect 
estimate is 
speculative at this 
time. 
 
 
 
31 
 
Table 4. Summary of recommendations of the AGA Clinical Guidelines Committee for the Management of Moderate-to-Severe Ulcerative 
Colitis 
Recommendations 
Strength of 
recommendation 
Quality of 
evidence 
1. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA recommends using 
infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab, tofacitinib or ustekinumab over no 
treatment. 
(Medications are ordered based on year of approval by the US FDA) 
Strong 
Moderate 
2a. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who are naïve to biologic 
agents, the AGA suggests using infliximab or vedolizumab rather than adalimumab, for 
induction of remission. 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
convenience of self-administered subcutaneous injection, and a lower value on the relative 
efficacy of medications, may reasonably chose adalimumab as an alternative. 
Conditional 
Moderate 
2b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who are naïve to biologic 
agents, the AGA recommends that tofacitinib be only be used in biologic-naive patients in 
the setting of a clinical or registry study. (No recommendation, knowledge gap) Comment: 
Updated FDA recommendations (07/26/2019) on indications for use of tofacitinib in ulcerative 
No 
recommendation 
Knowledge Gap 
32 
 
colitis recommends its use only after failure of, or intolerance to TNFα antagonists. 
2c. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who have previously been 
exposed to infliximab, particularly those with primary non-response, the AGA suggests 
using ustekinumab or tofacitinib, rather than vedolizumab or adalimumab for induction of 
remission.  
Conditional 
Low 
3a. In adult outpatients with active moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
against using thiopurine monotherapy for induction of remission.   
Conditional 
Very low 
3b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis in remission, the AGA 
suggests using thiopurine monotherapy, rather than no treatment, for maintenance of 
remission.  
Conditional 
Low 
3c. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests against 
using methotrexate monotherapy, for induction or maintenance of remission.  
Conditional 
Low 
4a. In adult outpatients with active moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
using biologic monotherapy (TNF-α antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab) or 
tofacitinib rather than thiopurine monotherapy for induction of remission. 
Conditional 
Low 
4b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis in remission, the AGA 
makes no recommendation in favor of, or against, using biologic monotherapy or 
tofacitinib, rather than thiopurine monotherapy for maintenance of remission. 
No 
recommendation 
Knowledge gap 
33 
 
5a. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
combining TNFα antagonists, vedolizumab or ustekinumab with thiopurines or 
methotrexate, rather than biologic monotherapy.  
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
safety of biologic monotherapy, and lower value on the efficacy of combination therapy, may 
reasonably chose biologic monotherapy. 
Conditional 
Low 
5b. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
combining TNF-α antagonists,  vedolizumab or ustekinumab with thiopurines or 
methotrexate rather than thiopurine monotherapy.  
Conditional 
Low 
6. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests early use 
of biologic agents with or without immunomodulator therapy, rather than gradual step up 
after failure of 5-aminosalicylates. 
Comment: Patients, particularly those with less severe disease, who place higher value on the 
safety of 5-ASA therapy, and lower value on the efficacy of biologic agents or tofacitinib, may 
reasonably chose gradual step therapy with 5-ASA therapy. 
Conditional 
Very low 
7. In adult outpatients with moderate-severe ulcerative colitis who have achieved 
remission with biologic agents and/or immunomodulators or tofacitinib, the AGA 
suggests against continuing 5-aminosalicylates for induction and maintenance of 
Conditional 
Very low 
34 
 
remission. 
 
 
 
8. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis, the AGA suggests 
using intravenous methylprednisolone dose equivalent of 40 to 60mg/d rather than higher 
dose intravenous corticosteroids. 
Conditional 
Very low 
9. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis without infections, the 
AGA suggests against adjunctive antibiotics. 
Conditional 
Very low 
10. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis refractory to 
intravenous corticosteroids, the AGA suggests using infliximab or cyclosporine. 
Conditional 
Low 
11. In hospitalized adult patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis being treated with 
infliximab, the AGA makes no recommendation on routine use of intensive vs. standard 
infliximab dosing. 
No 
recommendation 
Knowledge gap 
Abbreviations 5-ASA 5-aminosalicylates, AGA American Gastroenterological Association, FDA Food and Drug Administration, TNF tumor 
necrosis factor, UC ulcerative colitis, US United States 
35 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Singh S, Feuerstein JD, Binion DG, et al. American Gastroenterological Association 
technical review on the management of mild-moderate ulcerative colits. 
Gastroenterology 2018. 
2. 
Fumery M, Singh S, Dulai PS, et al. Natural History of Adult Ulcerative Colitis in 
Population-based Cohorts: A Systematic Review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2017;16:343-356 e3. 
3. 
Fumery M, Singh S, Dulai PS, et al. Natural History of Adult Ulcerative Colitis in 
Population-based Cohorts: A Systematic Review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2018;16:343-356 e3. 
4. 
Narula N, Marshall JK, Colombel JF, et al. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: 
Infliximab or Cyclosporine as Rescue Therapy in Patients With Severe Ulcerative Colitis 
Refractory to Steroids. American Journal of Gastroenterology 2016;111:477-91. 
5. 
Dassopoulos T, Cohen RD, Scherl EJ, et al. Ulcerative Colitis Care Pathway. 
Gastroenterology 2015;149:238-45. 
6. 
Schroeder KW, Tremaine WJ, Ilstrup DM. Coated oral 5-aminosalicylic acid therapy for 
mildly to moderately active ulcerative colitis. A randomized study. N Engl J Med 
1987;317:1625-9. 
7. 
Truelove SC, Witts LJ. Cortisone in ulcerative colitis; final report on a therapeutic trial. Br 
Med J 1955;2:1041-8. 
8. 
Ungaro R, Mehandru S, Allen PB, et al. Ulcerative colitis. Lancet 2017;389:1756-1770. 
9. 
Ko CW, Singh S, Feuerstein JD, et al. American Gastroenterological Association 
Institute Guideline on the Management of Mild-to-Moderate Ulcerative Colitis. 
Gastroenterology 2018. 
10. 
Feuerstein JD, Nguyen GC, Kupfer SS, et al. American Gastroenterological Association 
Institute Guideline on Therapeutic Drug Monitoring in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. 
Gastroenterology 2017;153:827-834. 
11. 
American Gastroenterological Association. AGA Institute clinical practice guidline 
development process. Volume 2018. 
12. 
Sultan S, Falck-Ytter Y, Inadomi JM. The AGA institute process for developing clinical 
practice guidelines part one: grading the evidence. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2013;11:329-32. 
13. 
Institute of Medicine. Clinical Practice Guidlines We Can Trust. Washington, DC.: 
National Academies Press, 2011. 
14. 
Cipriani A, Higgins JP, Geddes JR, et al. Conceptual and technical challenges in 
network meta-analysis. Annals of internal medicine 2013;159:130-137. 
15. 
Singh S, George J, Boland BS, et al. Primary non-response to tumor necrosis factor 
antagonists is associated with inferior response to second-line biologics in patients with 
inflammatory bowel diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Crohn's 
and Colitis 2018;12:635-643. 
16. 
Caprilli R, Carratu R, Babbini M. Double-blind comparison of the effectiveness of 
azathioprine and sulfasalazine in idiopathic proctocolitis. Preliminary report. Am J Dig 
Dis 1975;20:115-20. 
17. 
Jewell DP, Truelove SC. Azathioprine in ulcerative colitis: final report on controlled 
therapeutic trial. British Medical Journal 1974;4:627-30. 
18. 
Mate-Jimenez J, Hermida C, Cantero-Perona J, et al. 6-Mercaptopurine or methotrexate 
added to prednisone induces and maintains remission in steroid-dependent 
inflammatory bowel disease. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 
2000;12:1227-1233. 
36 
 
19. 
Rosenberg JL, Wall AJ, Levin B, et al. A controlled trial of azathioprine in the 
management of chronic ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1975;69:96-9. 
20. 
Sood A, Midha V, Sood N, et al. Role of azathioprine in severe ulcerative colitis: one-
year, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Indian Journal of Gastroenterology 
2000;19:14-6. 
21. 
Ardizzone S, Maconi G, Russo A, et al. Randomised controlled trial of azathioprine and 
5-aminosalicylic acid for treatment of steroid dependent ulcerative colitis. Gut 
2006;55:47-53. 
22. 
Hawthorne AB, Logan RF, Hawkey CJ, et al. Randomised controlled trial of azathioprine 
withdrawal in ulcerative colitis. BMJ 1992;305:20-2. 
23. 
Sood A, Kaushal V, Midha V, et al. The beneficial effect of azathioprine on maintenance 
of remission in severe ulcerative colitis. Journal of gastroenterology. Volume 37, 
2002:270-274. 
24. 
Sood A, Midha V, Sood N, et al. Azathioprine versus sulfasalazine in maintenance of 
remission in severe ulcerative colitis. Indian journal of gastroenterology. Volume 22, 
2003:79-81. 
25. 
Herfarth H, Barnes EL, Valentine JF, et al. Methotrexate is not superior to placebo in 
maintaining steroid-free response or remission in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 
2018. 
26. 
Oren R, Arber N, Odes S, et al. Methotrexate in chronic active ulcerative colitis: a 
double-blind, randomized, Israeli multicenter trial. Gastroenterology 1996;110:1416-21. 
27. 
Panaccione R, Ghosh S, Middleton S, et al. Combination therapy with infliximab and 
azathioprine is superior to monotherapy with either agent in ulcerative colitis. 
Gastroenterology. Volume 146, 2014:392-400.e3. 
28. 
Vermeire S, Gils A, Accossato P, et al. Immunogenicity of biologics in inflammatory 
bowel disease. Therapeutic advances in gastroenterology 2018;11:1756283X17750355. 
29. 
Nguyen GC, Gulamhusein A, Bernstein CN. 5-aminosalicylic acid is not protective 
against colorectal cancer in inflammatory bowel disease: a meta-analysis of non-referral 
populations. The American journal of gastroenterology 2012;107:1298. 
30. 
O'connor A, Packey CD, Akbari M, et al. Mesalamine, but not sulfasalazine, reduces the 
risk of colorectal neoplasia in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: an agent-
specific systematic review and meta-analysis. Inflammatory bowel diseases 
2015;21:2562-2569. 
31. 
Rubin DT, Huo D, Kinnucan JA, et al. Inflammation is an independent risk factor for 
colonic neoplasia in patients with ulcerative colitis: a case–control study. Clinical 
gastroenterology and hepatology 2013;11:1601-1608. e4. 
32. 
Turner D, Walsh CM, Steinhart AH, et al. Response to Corticosteroids in Severe 
Ulcerative Colitis: A Systematic Review of the Literature and a Meta-Regression. Clinical 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2007;5:103-110. 
33. 
Seo M, Okada M, Yao T, et al. Evaluation of the clinical course of acute attacks in 
patients with ulcerative colitis through the use of an activity index. J Gastroenterol 
2002;37:29-34. 
34. 
Chapman RW, Selby WS, Jewell DP. Controlled trial of intravenous metronidazole as an 
adjunct to corticosteroids in severe ulcerative colitis. Gut 1986;27:1210-2. 
35. 
Dickinson RJ, O'Connor HJ, Pinder I. Double blind controlled trial of oral vancomycin as 
adjunctive treatment in acute exacerbations of idiopathic colitis. Gut 1985;26:1380-1384. 
36. 
Mantzaris GJ, Hatzis A, Kontogiannis P, et al. Intravenous tobramycin and 
metronidazole as an adjunct to corticosteroids in acute, severe ulcerative colitis. 
American Journal of Gastroenterology 1994;89:43-6. 
37 
 
37. 
Mantzaris GJ, Petraki K, Archavlis E, et al. A prospective randomized controlled trial of 
intravenous ciprofloxacin as an adjunct to corticosteroids in acute, severe ulcerative 
colitis. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 2001;36:971-974. 
38. 
Jarnerot G, Hertervig E, Friis-Liby I, et al. Infliximab as rescue therapy in severe to 
moderately severe ulcerative colitis: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. 
Gastroenterology 2005;128:1805-11. 
39. 
Lichtiger S, Present DH, Kornbluth A, et al. Cyclosporine in severe ulcerative colitis 
refractory to steroid therapy. New England Journal of Medicine 1994;330:1841-5. 
40. 
Van Assche G, D'Haens G, Noman M, et al. Randomized, double-blind comparison of 4 
mg/kg versus 2 mg/kg intravenous cyclosporine in severe ulcerative colitis. 
Gastroenterology 2003;125:1025-1031. 
41. 
Laharie D, Bourreille A, Branche J, et al. Ciclosporin versus infliximab in patients with 
severe ulcerative colitis refractory to intravenous steroids: a parallel, open-label 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;380:1909-15. 
42. 
Williams JG, Alam MF, Alrubaiy L, et al. Infliximab versus ciclosporin for steroid-resistant 
acute severe ulcerative colitis (CONSTRUCT): a mixed methods, open-label, pragmatic 
randomised trial. The Lancet. Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2016;1:15-24. 
43. 
Choy MC, Seah D, Gorelik A, et al. Predicting response after infliximab salvage in acute 
severe ulcerative colitis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;33:1347-1352. 
44. 
Gibson DJ, Heetun ZS, Redmond CE, et al. An accelerated infliximab induction regimen 
reduces the need for early colectomy in patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:330-335 e1. 
45. 
Govani SM WA, Stidham RW, Higgins PDR, Hardiman K. Accelerated Dosing of 
Infliximab Prevents Colectomy Within 90 Days in Only Half of Patients With Severe 
Ulcerative Colitis. Gastroenterology 2016;150:S106. 
46. 
Shah SC, Naymagon S, Cohen BL, et al. There is Significant Practice Pattern Variability 
in the Management of the Hospitalized Ulcerative Colitis Patient at a Tertiary Care and 
IBD Referral Center. J Clin Gastroenterol 2018;52:333-338. 
47. 
Brandse JF, van den Brink GR, Wildenberg ME, et al. Loss of Infliximab Into Feces Is 
Associated With Lack of Response to Therapy in Patients With Severe Ulcerative Colitis. 
Gastroenterology 2015;149:350-5 e2. 
 
 
 
