2
Journal of Crohn's and Colitis, 2022, 2–17
https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjab178
Advance Access publication October 12, 2021
ECCO Guideline/Consensus Paper
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
ECCO Guideline/Consensus Paper
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative 
Colitis: Medical Treatment
Tim Raine,a, Stefanos Bonovas,b, Johan Burisch,c, Torsten Kucharzik,d 
Michel Adamina,e, Vito Annese,f Oliver Bachmann,g, 
Dominik Bettenworth,h Maria Chaparro,i,  
Wladyslawa Czuber-Dochan,j Piotr Eder,k, Pierre Ellul,l 
Catarina Fidalgo,m, Gionata Fiorino,n, Paolo Gionchetti,o 
Javier P. Gisbert,i Hannah Gordon,p Charlotte Hedin,q, Stefan Holubar,r, 
Marietta Iacucci,s Konstantinos Karmiris,t Konstantinos Katsanos,u 
Uri Kopylov,v Peter L Lakatos,w, Theodore Lytras,x, Ivan Lyutakov,y 
Nurulamin Noor,a, Gianluca Pellino,z,aa, Daniele Piovani,b 
Edoardo Savarino,bb, Francesco Selvaggi,z Bram Verstockt,cc, 
Antonino Spinelli,b Yves Panis,dd, Glen Dohertyee
aDepartment of Gastroenterology, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge, UK bDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University; IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, 
Milan, Italy cGastrounit, Medical Division, Hvidovre Hospital; Copenhagen Center for Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
in Children, Adolescents and Adults, Hvidovre Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Denmark dDepartment of 
Gastroenterology, Lüneburg Hospital, University of Hamburg, Lüneburg, Germany eDepartment of Surgery, Clinic 
of Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, Cantonal Hospital Winterthur, Zurich, Switzerland Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Clinical Research and Artificial Intelligence in Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Basel, 
Allschwil, Switzerland fDepartment of Gastroenterology, Fakeeh University Hospital, Dubai, UAE gDepartment 
of Internal Medicine I, Siloah St. Trudpert Hospital, Pforzheim; Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany 
hUniversity Hospital Munster, Department of Medicine B - Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Munster, Germany 
iGastroenterology Unit, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa (IIS-IP), 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas 
y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Madrid, Spain jKing’s College London, Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery 
and Palliative Care, London, UK kDepartment of Gastroenterology, Dietetics and Internal Medicine - Poznań 
University of Medical Sciences; Heliodor Święcicki University Hospital, Poznań, Poland lDepartment of Medicine, 
Division of Gastroenterology, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta mGastroenterology Division, Hospital Beatriz Ângelo, 
Loures, Portugal nDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University; IBD Center, Humanitas Clinical and 
Research Center, Milan, Italy oIBD Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna DIMEC, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy pDepartment of Gastroenterology, Barts Health NHS Trust, Royal London Hospital, London, UK 
qKarolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine Solna; Karolinska University Hospital, Department of Gastroenterology, 
Dermatovenereology and Rheumatology, Stockholm, Sweden rDepartment of Colon & Rectal Surgery, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA sInstitute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, 
University of Birmingham; Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust, Birmingham, UK 
tDepartment of Gastroenterology, Venizeleio General Hospital, Heraklion, Greece uDepartment of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Division of Internal Medicine, University and Medical School of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece 
vDepartment of Gastroenterology, Tel-HaShomer Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, and Sackler Medical School, 
Tel Aviv, Israel wDivision of Gastroenterology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada; 1st Department 
of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary xSchool of Medicine, European University Cyprus, Nicosia, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
3
Cyprus yDepartment of Gastroenterology, University Hospital ‘Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL’, Medical University Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria zDepartment of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, Universitá degli Studi della Campania 
‘Luigi Vanvitelli’, Naples, Italy aaColorectal Surgery, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain bbDepartment 
of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy ccDepartment of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven; Department of Chronic Diseases, Metabolism and Ageing, 
TARGID - IBD, Leuven, Belgium ddDepartment of Colorectal Surgery, Beaujon Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Clichy and Université of Paris, France eeDepartment of Gastroenterology and Centre for Colorectal Disease, 
St Vincent’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Corresponding author: Tim Raine, MB, PhD, MRCP, Department of Gastroenterology, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK. Email: tim.raine@addenbrookes.nhs.uk
1.  Introduction
Ulcerative colitis [UC] is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease [IBD] 
characterised by colonic inflammation extending to a variable extent 
from the rectum. Care of the patient with UC requires appropriate 
input from across the multiprofessional team. These guidelines sum-
marise the recommended medical treatment for adults with UC. 
Other ECCO guidelines consider the approach to UC diagnosis 
and monitoring,1–3 nursing care,4 management of disease compli-
cations,5–7 risk of infection,8 and technical aspects of surgery.9 This 
document was prepared as part of a process that also led to the 
publication of a related guideline with recommendations on the sur-
gical care of the patients with UC and on the medical aspects of 
the management of the patient hospitalised with severe UC. ECCO 
Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis: Surgical Treatment.
Patients living with UC can have a variable disease course.10 
In this document, we discuss therapeutic approaches stratified by 
disease severity [mildly-to-moderately active and moderately-to-
severely active disease]. Attempts to define disease severity are widely 
used in setting clinical trial inclusion criteria and can be measured 
according to several different definitions.11 Trial populations will in-
evitably vary, and we reflect the continuum of disease severity by 
having the moderate disease category span both broad categories. It 
is also important to remember that these definitions capture severity 
at a given point in time and may not reflect the cumulative long-term 
burden of disease experienced by a patient.12
It is also important to consider disease extent when plan-
ning treatment in UC, as this may affect the optimal route of 
drug administration. This is typically defined according to dis-
ease involving the rectum only [proctitis], disease distal to the 
splenic flexure [left-sided UC], or disease extending proximal to 
the splenic flexure [extensive UC].13 These definitions of disease 
extent are recognised as somewhat arbitrary; in clinical practice, 
topically administered therapies are often used for UC whose ex-
tent is limited to the rectum and a portion of the sigmoid colon 
[proctosigmoiditis], with the term ‘distal colitis’ used to describe 
this disease distribution. It should be remembered that disease dis-
tribution can change10,14 and that proximal disease extension can 
be a negative prognostic marker.15
2.  Methods
This document was compiled following the ‘Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation’ 
[GRADE] methodology.16 A panel of 33 experts was selected by the 
Guidelines Committee of ECCO from a competitive pool of appli-
cants and worked with a team of methodologists and librarians. All 
panellists received training in the GRADE methodology. Additionally, 
six patients with UC, representing the European Federation of 
Crohn’s and Colitis Associations [EFCCA], were invited to partici-
pate in all face-to-face meetings as full voting members.
Two domains for the medical treatment of UC were identified 
and used as the basis for the following two working groups based 
upon disease severity: mildly-to-moderately active disease and 
moderately-to-severely active disease. We recognise that these divi-
sions are somewhat arbitrary, partially overlapping, and inconsist-
ently defined; therefore, we ensured close collaboration between the 
working groups to ensure that key topics were covered appropriately 
with the aim of providing guidance applicable across the continuum 
of UC severity encountered in clinical practice.
Working group participants first formulated a series of spe-
cific questions using the Population, Intervention, Comparator, 
Outcomes [PICO] system, which were deemed to be clinically im-
portant for the medical treatment of UC. These questions were 
debated in a series of telephone conferences before final agreement 
at a meeting of the full guideline group in Vienna in November 
2019. Voting on the inclusion of PICO questions was conducted, 
and only those achieving agreement of >80% by the panel were 
included in the next phase of the process. At this meeting, the pan-
ellists also ranked each outcome’s importance on a scale of 1 to 
9 based on the GRADE definitions.16 Scores of 7‒9 indicated an 
outcome that is critical to patients for decision making; scores of 
4‒6 indicated an important outcome, but not critical; and scores 
of 1‒3 indicated an outcome of limited importance. The panel-
lists’ agreement on outcomes’ importance was assessed using the 
Disagreement Index, as described in the RAND/UCLA appropri-
ateness method.17
The team of librarians performed a comprehensive literature 
search on PubMed/Medline, Embase, and the Cochrane Central data-
bases, using specific search strings for each PICO question [available 
as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online]. Two working group 
members [one assigned to the PICO question and another from the 
same group as second reviewer] independently screened titles and ab-
stracts to exclude any irrelevant reports. Subsequently, the working 
group members assigned to each PICO question assessed the full text 
of the selected publications for relevance to the specific PICO. Note 
that studies were only selected if they addressed the PICO as formu-
lated, including data on at least one of the outcomes of interest for 
the relevant dose of the intervention. In some instances, this meant 
that randomised controlled trials [RCTs] of a drug of interest were 
not included because, for example, they did not report at least one 
outcome defined as being of critical importance.
Most of the evidence informing the guidelines in this document 
came from randomised controlled trials conducted in adult patients 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
4
T. Raine et al.
with UC. The methodologists directly performed the comparisons. 
The risk ratio [RR] was used to measure treatment effects. Study-
level RRs with 95% confidence intervals [CIs] were calculated in 
accordance with the intention-to-treat principle. When zero events 
occurred in one group of a trial, we used a continuity correction that 
was inversely proportional to the relative size of the other group. To 
synthesise the evidence, we prepared forest plots and calculated the 
pooled effect estimates using random-effects models [DerSimonian 
and Laird approach].18 We used R software for statistical analysis. 
All p-values are two-tailed. For all tests [except for heterogeneity], a 
p-value <0.05 indicates statistical significance.
To calculate absolute benefits and harms, we relied on the pooled 
event rates in the control groups. The absolute effect was based on 
the pooled RR and the baseline risk in the control groups.
The quality of evidence was expressed using the following four 
categories: high, moderate, low, and very low. For each PICO ques-
tion, we rated the quality of evidence separately for each patient-
important outcome, and then determined the overall quality of 
evidence across outcomes. For a guideline panel, the quality of evi-
dence reflects the extent to which the confidence in the effect esti-
mate is adequate to support a particular recommendation.16
To determine the quality of the evidence for each outcome across 
all studies, we started with rating the evidence from RCTs as ‘high’ 
quality, and then assessed the following five factors that could lead 
to down-rating the quality of evidence: risk of bias, inconsistency, 
indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias.16 Risk of bias was 
assessed using the Cochrane tool. Inconsistency was assessed with 
the Cochrane Q test [using a 0.10 significance level] and the I2 metric 
[with values >50% suggesting significant heterogeneity]. Indirectness 
was determined according to whether the studies addressed a dif-
ferent but related population, intervention, or outcome from the 
one of interest. Imprecision was based on the number of events [the 
quality of evidence was downgraded by one level when the total 
number of events was <100, and by two levels when it was <50]. 
Publication bias was assessed using funnel plots, and the Begg’s and 
Egger’s tests only if there were at least 10 studies included in the 
meta-analysis.
The overall quality of evidence was a combined rating of the 
quality of evidence across all outcomes considered critical for de-
cision making; the lowest quality of evidence for any of the critical 
outcomes determined the overall quality of evidence. Summary-of-
Findings [SoF] tables showing all studies used in preparing each 
recommendation, key data and study findings for each outcome of 
interest, and our judgements about each of the quality of evidence 
factors examined are available as Supplementary material, along 
with documentation of the assessment of evidence quality. We pre-
sent our rating of quality of evidence for: each one of the outcomes; 
the risk with control group; the risk with intervention group; the 
meta-analytic effect estimate; the anticipated absolute effects; and 
any other relevant information regarding the data reported in the 
SoF table; along with our rating of the overall quality of evidence 
across outcomes.
The strength of each recommendation was graded either as 
‘strong’ [meaning that the desirable effects of an intervention clearly 
outweigh the undesirable effects, or vice versa] or as ‘weak’ [meaning 
that the balance is less certain], while also considering the quality of 
evidence, values and preferences of patients, balance between desir-
able and undesirable effects, and cost-effectiveness. All recommenda-
tions were subject to online voting by the panel members, the ECCO 
National Representatives [two for each country affiliated with 
ECCO], six reviewers from the European Society of Coloproctology, 
and nine additional reviewers from a list of ECCO members involved 
in ECCO guideline development [see Acknowledgements section]. 
The final version of all statements/recommendations was discussed 
among panel members during a final virtual consensus meeting in 
April 2021 and put to a vote; final recommendations were approved 
if at least 80% of the panellists agreed with the statement and its as-
sociated strength grading. The list of statements, supporting text and 
material, and manuscript draft were critically reviewed by the ECCO 
Governing Board members, who also approved the final version of 
these guidelines.
These guidelines are designed to inform and support clinicians 
in making evidence-based decisions on the medical treatment of UC; 
they should not be used to signify a minimal acceptable standard 
of care, should not be used for medicolegal purposes, and should 
not be interpreted as endorsing the use of any particular proprietary 
or commercial product. All costs associated with the development 
and publication of this guideline were met by ECCO. The Governing 
Board of ECCO played no role in the selection of panel members or 
the development or selection of PICO questions. A summary of some 
of the key changes from previous ECCO UC guidelines is presented 
in the Supplementary material.
3.  General Approach to the Management of 
Ulcerative Colitis
These guidelines set out the evidence for the use of different medical 
therapies in the treatment of UC. They were developed and written 
in a manner driven by the available data, which were typically from 
large-scale clinical trials and usually based upon testing of an inter-
vention against placebo. Nevertheless, the medical care of a patient 
with UC goes well beyond the selection between a given drug and 
no treatment. Furthermore, patients encountered in the clinic fre-
quently do not fit the profile of a given clinical trial population. It 
is therefore important that these guidelines are used first to inform 
the physician of the quality of evidence behind any given treatment, 
which the physician must then consider, together with the patient, in 
formulating a treatment plan.
A key area of debate is when to escalate treatment. There is 
less evidence in UC than in Crohn’s disease on the importance of 
early treatment escalation. At the same time, the experience of 
recurrent symptom flares can lead to physical and psychological 
harm,19,20 as can repeated exposure to corticosteroids.21 Although 
the cost of an intervention is a factor reflected in the GRADE 
process when forming the strength of recommendation, as inter-
national guidelines there will be local health economic consid-
erations that this document can not address. Nevertheless, it is 
clear that appropriate and timely selection of patients for higher-
cost interventions is critical to achieve optimal health economic 
outcomes.22,23
The ultimate goal of treatment in UC is to maintain health-related 
quality of life [QoL] and avoid disability.24 To achieve this, it is im-
portant to not only provide rapid relief of clinical symptoms, but 
also achieve endoscopic healing where possible, as this is associated 
with improved long-term outcomes.25–27 The importance of these 
outcomes was reflected in the decision by the expert panel to select 
endoscopic and clinical outcomes as being of critical importance.
The term ‘conventional therapy’ has been widely used in the 
past to differentiate well-established traditional treatments (such 
as 5-aminosalicylates [5-ASA], corticosteroids, and thiopurine 
immunomodulators) from biologic therapies and other novel tar-
geted small molecules. This concept is becoming somewhat outdated, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
5
as the costs of and access to biologics therapies evolve [notably 
with the introduction of biosimilars] and biologics are increasingly 
viewed as a conventional part of UC treatment. For the purposes of 
this guideline, we agreed to use the term ‘conventional therapy’ as it 
has traditionally been understood, in the absence of any widely ac-
cepted alternative nomenclature, while also accepting the limitations 
of this language. Where specific definitions of conventional therapy 
have been used in individual studies, these are outlined in the sup-
porting SOF tables.
Dose escalation has been reported for many of the interven-
tions we considered, typically in a non-randomised manner, both for 
patients showing disease flares during RCTs or in cohort studies. 
Although appropriate dose escalation or dose optimisation can play 
a role in clinical practice, there are minimal high-quality trial data 
in this area, and uncontrolled studies are subject to several potential 
forms of bias. For this reason, we have restricted our recommenda-
tions to the doses studied in a randomised manner in clinical trials. 
In addition to the initiation and escalation of medical treatments for 
UC, how and when to consider reducing or stopping treatment to 
minimise the risks, costs, and burden to patients of prolonged drug 
therapy is an important consideration. The limited evidence on treat-
ment withdrawal has been reviewed recently and is beyond the scope 
of this current guideline.28
4.  Medical Management of Mildly-to-
moderately Active Ulcerative Colitis
4.1.  Induction of remission in mildly-to-moderately 
active ulcerative colitis
5-aminosalicylates
We performed a meta-analysis of 11 eligible RCTs with a total of 
2156 patients evaluated for 4–12 weeks; 5-aminosalicylates [5-ASA] 
had a significantly higher efficacy in achieving clinical remission 
[RR: 1.56] versus placebo [95% CI: 1.24–1.97]. Similarly, the clin-
ical response in 14 studies [total 2025 patients] evaluated at 2–10 
weeks was significantly better for 5-ASA [RR: 1.58; 95% CI: 1.35–
1.86] with response in 59% of patients receiving 5-ASA compared 
with 35% of those receiving placebo. The efficacy of 5-ASA on endo-
scopic response as evaluated in four RCTs with 416 patients inves-
tigated after 4–12 weeks was better with 5-ASA [RR: 1.73; 95% 
CI: 1.0–3.0]; 5-ASA was generally very well tolerated. The serious 
adverse event [SAE] rate evaluated in 13 studies with 2141 patients 
for a maximal follow-up of 12 weeks was 6.1% versus 9% in the 
placebo arms [RR: 0.81; 95% CI: 0.47–1.38].
The quality of evidence was globally evaluated as low due to 
significant heterogeneity and possible publication and reporting bias 
for certain outcomes [SoF Table 1, available as Supplementary data 
at ECCO-JCC online].
A Cochrane meta-analysis confirmed the similar efficacy of 
once-daily or more frequent dosing regimens across multiple 
studies.29 This meta-analysis did not show any apparent differences 
in outcomes between different formulations of 5-ASA considered. 
Notably, despite discussion regarding differences of colonic distri-
bution of different mesalazine preparations, no significant differ-
ences in outcomes were observed in any mesalazine comparator 
studies. For this reason, patients with mildly active UC who fail to 
reach remission with appropriately dosed oral 5-ASA are unlikely 
to achieve remission upon switching to an alternative oral 5-ASA 
formulation.
The same Cochrane meta-analysis did not find overall evidence 
for superior efficacy of higher total daily doses across multiple 
dose-ranging trials when compared with standard licensed doses 
of the same formulation.29 Subgroup evaluation of the ASCEND 
trials suggested a benefit of 4.8  g/day of a polymer-coated for-
mulation of mesalazine [with pH-dependent release] compared 
with 2.4  g/day in patients with more active disease or in those 
with previous treatment with corticosteroids, oral 5-ASA, rectal 
therapies, or multiple UC medications.30–32 Likewise, a post-hoc 
analysis of ASCEND data also showed greater rates of mucosal 
healing in the 4.8 g/day group than in the 2.4 g/day group.33 In 
contrast, subgroup analysis restricted according to disease severity 
did not reveal any differences in outcomes between 4.8 g/day and 
2.4 g/day in trials of a pH-dependent multimatrix (MMX) 5-ASA 
preparation.29,34
We identified eight suitable studies that assessed a dose of ≥1 g top-
ical 5-ASA per day for 2–8 weeks which we used for meta-analysis 
[SoF Table 2, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC on-
line].35–42 All studies required endoscopic confirmation of rectal in-
flammation but varied in the maximum proximal limit of disease 
extent permitted [from a maximum of 20 cm from the anal verge to 
no upper limit]. There was a significant increase in clinical response 
and clinical remission when compared with placebo-treated patients 
[RR: 2.46; 95% CI: 2.01–3.01 and RR: 3.56; 95% CI: 2.08–6.09, 
respectively]. In addition, endoscopic response in five studies that 
assessed 1  g 5-ASA daily for 2–8 weeks, as induction therapy in 
distal colitis, was significantly more frequently achieved in patients 
treated with 5-ASA than those treated with placebo [RR: 2.75; 95% 
CI: 2.04–3.7]. No significant differences in SAEs between topical 
5-ASA treatment and placebo were observed [RR: 0.26; 95% CI: 
0.03–2.29].
Overall, the quality of available evidence was classified as low. 
Despite this, our recommendation is strong considering the extensive 
clinical experience corroborating efficacy and very few SAEs related 
to topical 5-ASA administration.
Recommendation 1
We recommend 5-aminosalicylates at a dose of ≥2  g/
day [d] to induce remission in patients with mildly-to-
moderately active UC [strong recommendation; quality of 
evidence low]
Recommendation 2
We recommend topical [rectal] 5-ASA at a dose of ≥1 g/d 
for the induction of remission in active distal colitis 
[strong recommendation, low-quality evidence]
Recommendation 3
We suggest the use of oral 5-ASA [≥2 g/d] combined with 
topical [rectal] 5-ASA over oral 5-ASA monotherapy for 
induction of remission in adult patients with active UC of 
at least rectosigmoid extent [weak recommendation; very 
low-quality evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
6
T. Raine et al.
Only a few trials were retrieved that compared the use of oral 5-ASA 
combined with topical 5-ASA versus oral 5-ASA as monotherapy for 
induction of remission in adult patients with active UC [SoF Table 3, 
available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].43–46 In all of 
these studies, the desirable effects of 5-ASA combined therapy [com-
pared with oral monotherapy] probably outweigh the undesirable 
effects of this intervention, although the level of uncertainty is high.
Two trials compared these two therapeutic strategies for clinical 
response in patients with disease of at least rectosigmoid extent.43,44 
The trials were heterogeneous in terms of study design, 5-ASA doses, 
definition of clinical activity, and definition of clinical improvement. 
In the pooled analysis, no significant advantage of combined therapy 
over 5-ASA monotherapy in clinical response was observed [RR: 
1.1; 95% CI: 0.95–1.27].
Four trials addressed whether combined 5-ASA therapy is su-
perior to oral monotherapy in inducing clinical remission in active 
UC.43–46 These studies included 322 patients and treatment duration 
was 3–8 weeks. All trials were heterogeneous in terms of patient 
characteristics, criteria used to define disease activity and remission, 
doses, and 5-ASA regimens. There was a serious inconsistency of 
evidence [I2 = 71%] and a serious risk of bias, as the methods of se-
quence generation and allocation concealment were unclear in three 
of four studies. The RR of obtaining clinical remission between com-
bined [oral and topical] 5-ASA treatment versus oral monotherapy 
was 1.45 [95% CI: 0.98–2.13].
There was only one trial on the influence of combined versus oral 
5-ASA therapy on endoscopic activity of UC.44 Patients receiving 2 g 
of 5-ASA orally plus 2 g of 5-ASA enemas more frequently achieved 
endoscopic remission than those treated with 4 g of 5-ASA orally 
plus placebo enemas. However, the difference was not statistically 
significant [RR: 1.21; 95% CI: 0.91–1.61]. The quality of evidence 
for this outcome was downgraded because of serious indirectness 
[the study assessed endoscopic remission, instead of the outcome of 
interest, which was an endoscopic response] and imprecision [only 
77 events in the study].
It is difficult to compare the safety of combined versus oral 5-ASA 
induction treatment since only one trial addressed this question, with 
very sparse data.43 Only four SAEs were detected; 3/71 patients in 
the combined treatment group and 1/56 patients in the oral 5-ASA 
plus placebo enema group experienced SAEs [RR: 2.37; 95% CI: 
0.25–22.14]. In parallel to this very serious imprecision, there was 
also a serious risk of bias. Therefore, the quality of the data for this 
outcome was assessed to be very low.
Overall, we felt that the trend towards better outcomes for 
combined therapy, clinical experience, and the low cost and risk 
of the intervention all justified a weak recommendation in favour 
of combined therapy in patients for whom combined therapy was 
acceptable.
Topical corticosteroids
The use of topically administered steroids has been long established 
for the induction of remission in patients with proctitis and distal 
colitis. Topically applied steroids offer the advantage over systemic 
steroids of a more targeted treatment with fewer systemic side ef-
fects; however, topical treatments may be poorly accepted by some 
patients due to the route of administration.
Several systematic reviews have been conducted on this topic,47–53 
but none included all of the available RCT evidence that was iden-
tified here. Therefore, we performed a meta-analysis of five RCTs 
that compared topical steroids with placebo [SoF Table 4, available 
as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].54–58 Topical steroids 
were superior to placebo in induction of clinical remission [pooled 
RR: 2.12; 95% CI: 1.48–3.06], clinical response [RR: 2.18; 95% 
CI: 1.58–3.01], and endoscopic response [RR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.21–
1.70]. SAEs did not occur more frequently compared with placebo 
[RR: 0.68; 95% CI: 0.10–4.40]. The number of patients included 
in each study was quite low and the quality of evidence was very 
low. This was due to indirectness and imprecision identified for the 
SAE outcome [a critical outcome, although other critical outcomes 
were judged to have high-quality evidence]. Overall, we believe that 
the experience with topical steroids in clinical practice, the favour-
able balance between their potential benefits and harms (there was 
no statistically significant difference in adverse events [AE] between 
topical steroids versus placebo), and their low cost support the rec-
ommendation of topical steroids as an option for induction of remis-
sion in patients with active UC.
The effect of treatment with topical 5-ASA at a dose ≥1 g/day or 
topical steroids [suppositories or enemas] for induction of remission 
in adult patients with active distal UC has been investigated in 13 
studies.38,59–70 We performed a meta-analysis of these studies, which 
included a total of 1395 patients treated with topical 5-ASA at >1 g/
day or topical steroids [suppositories or enemas], with outcomes 
captured at 2–8 weeks [SoF Table 5, available as Supplementary data 
at ECCO-JCC online].
Topical 5-ASAs were superior for the induction of clinical 
remission [RR: 1.36; 95% CI: 1.19–1.56] but were not signifi-
cantly more effective than topical steroids in inducing clinical 
response [RR: 1.09; 95% CI: 0.97–1.22]. In five studies68–72 
including 376 patients followed for 2–4 weeks, endoscopic re-
sponse was equally likely to be achieved with either topical 
5-ASA or topical steroids [RR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.82–1.44]. In nine 
studies61,63,65–69,71,72 including 1306 patients, the rates of SAEs did 
not differ between topical 5-ASA or topical steroids [RR: 1.21; 
95% CI: 0.47–3.08]. Overall, the quality of evidence was rated 
as very low.
Although patients should generally be treated with a single 
topical agent, there is some [very limited] evidence to suggest 
that combination rectal 5-ASA and rectal corticosteroid may be 
of benefit. This may be appropriate for some patients who fail 
to respond to initial rectal therapy.69 It is also important to be 
aware of differences between preparations in terms of delivery 
systems and formulations, all of which may have differences in 
patient acceptability. It is appropriate to offer a patient a trial 
of an alternative preparation if they are unable to tolerate an 
initial choice.
Recommendation 4
We recommend using topical [rectal] steroids for the in-
duction of remission in patients with active distal colitis 
[strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Recommendation 5
We suggest treatment with topical [rectal] 5-ASAs over 
topical [rectal] steroids for induction of remission in pa-
tients with active distal UC [weak recommendation, very 
low quality of evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
7
Colonic-release corticosteroids
The effect of treatment with colonic-release corticosteroids using 
once-daily budesonide MMX 9  mg for induction of remission in 
adult patients with active mild-to-moderate UC has been investi-
gated in three studies73–75 [SoF Table 6, available as Supplementary 
data at ECCO-JCC online]. A  total of 542 patients treated with 
colonic-release corticosteroids were included and followed for 8 
weeks. Colonic-release corticosteroids were superior to placebo in 
inducing clinical remission and clinical response [RR: 2.86; 95% CI 
1.62–5.04 and RR: 1.46; 95% CI: 1.11–1.93, respectively]. In two 
studies73,74 including 510 patients followed for 8 weeks, endoscopic 
response was more likely to be achieved with colonic-release cortico-
steroids in comparison with placebo [RR: 1.43; 95% CI: 1.10–1.84]. 
In all three studies, the rates of SAEs and of any AEs did not differ 
between colonic-release corticosteroids and placebo [RR: 0.88; 95% 
CI: 0.33–2.41 and RR: 1.04; 95% CI: 0.79–1.37, respectively]. The 
low number of SAEs resulted in a low quality of evidence for this 
critical endpoint, due to imprecision.
A pooled analysis of data from both phase 3 trials showed a 
combined clinical and endoscopic remission rate of 17.7% for 
budesonide MMX 9 mg/day versus 6.2% for placebo (odds ratio 
[OR]: 3.3; 95% CI: 1.7–6.4).76 Whereas subgroup analysis of these 
pooled data revealed that this benefit was seen in patients with left-
sided colitis, the difference between drug and placebo was not statis-
tically significant in those with more extensive disease.
Unlike other therapies, including 5-ASA, no data exist for the role 
of budesonide MMX as a maintenance therapy. This suggests that 
the most appropriate use of budesonide MMX may be in patients 
with mildly-to-moderately active disease who are not responding to 
or are intolerant to optimised 5-ASA therapy. An RCT comparing 
budesonide MMX 9 mg/day with placebo, in patients with mildly-
to-moderately active UC despite oral 5-ASA therapy, revealed a 
significant improvement in the primary endpoint of combined clin-
ical and endoscopic remission [13% vs 7.5%; p = 0.049) and histo-
logical healing in the treatment arm [27% vs 17.5%; p = 0.016].77
Immunomodulators
Two studies have reported on the use of azathioprine as mono-
therapy compared with placebo for induction of remission in pa-
tients with UC.78,79 Overall, only 130 patients in two RCTs were 
analysed and assessed for clinical remission after 1–4 months, with 
azathioprine given alongside a concomitant course of corticoster-
oids. We performed a meta-analysis of these studies and did not 
observe a difference between azathioprine and placebo for induction 
of clinical remission [RR: 1.22; 95% CI: 0.79–1.88] [SoF Table 7, 
available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online]. No placebo-
controlled data on clinical response, endoscopic response, or SAEs 
were available.
It should be noted that due to the relatively slow onset of ac-
tion of azathioprine, it may be appropriate to initiate azathioprine 
in patients with active disease where maintenance therapy with 
azathioprine is planned, but only when given alongside an effective 
induction agent.
We did not identify any studies using other thiopurines 
[mercaptopurine or thioguanine] for the induction of remission. Due 
to their related mechanism of action, we extend our recommenda-
tion against the use of azathioprine in induction of remission across 
the entire thiopurine class.
4.2.  Maintenance of remission in mildly-to-
moderately active ulcerative colitis
5-ASAs
We identified two RCTs involving 306 participants with 48–52 
weeks of follow-up, which provided evidence relevant to our PICO 
question. We synthesised these in a meta-analysis [SoF Table 8, avail-
able as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].
For clinical remission, there was moderate-quality evidence that 
oral 5-ASA [≥2 g/d] was statistically significantly superior to pla-
cebo for maintaining remission in adult patients with UC [RR: 1.54; 
95% CI: 1.11–2.14]. For endoscopic remission there was moderate-
quality evidence favouring the use of 5-ASA, but this did not reach 
significance [RR: 1.20; 95% CI: 1.00–1.44]. Only one RCT contrib-
uted evidence [of very low quality] for SAEs.80 Treatment with oral 
5-ASA [≥2 g/d] was associated with statistically significantly fewer 
SAEs [RR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.23–0.71].
Although the quality of evidence was judged to be overall very 
low [due to problems with data for SAEs], we nonetheless felt it ap-
propriate to make a strong recommendation, given the safety and 
relatively low cost of this intervention. An additional consideration 
may be the reported potential chemopreventive benefits of mainten-
ance 5-ASA treatment, although this finding has been inconsistently 
reported in the literature and may reflect selection bias seen in re-
ferral centre-based cohorts.81
We identified four placebo-controlled trials that assessed top-
ical 5-ASA as maintenance therapy in adult patients with distal 
UC or proctitis [SoF Table 9, available as Supplementary data at 
Recommendation 6
We suggest the use of colonic-release corticosteroids 
for induction of remission in patients with active mild-
to-moderate UC [weak recommendation, low quality of 
evidence]
Recommendation 7
We suggest against the use of thiopurines as mono-
therapy for the induction of remission in patients with 
active UC [weak recommendation, very low quality of 
evidence]
Recommendation 8
We recommend the use of oral 5-ASA at a dose ≥2 g/day 
for maintenance of remission in UC patients [strong rec-
ommendation; very low quality of evidence]
Recommendation 9
We suggest the use of topical [rectal] 5-ASA for the main-
tenance of remission in patients with distal UC [weak rec-
ommendation, very low-quality evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
8
T. Raine et al.
ECCO-JCC online].82–85 Doses used ranged between 1 g three times 
weekly and 1 g daily, administered as suppositories or enemas over 
a period of 12  months [three studies] to 24  months [one study]. 
The quality of evidence was rated as low due a to serious risk of 
bias and inconsistency. The same studies were identified in a pre-
vious Cochrane review.86 The use of topical 5-ASA as maintenance 
therapy in adult patients with distal UC or proctitis was significantly 
superior in maintenance of clinical remission compared with pla-
cebo [RR: 2.22; 95% CI: 1.26–3.90]. For the maintenance of endo-
scopic remission, data on the use of 1-g 5-ASA enemas in distal UC 
or proctitis are available for just 25 patients treated over the course 
of 12 months; 5-ASA was superior to placebo [RR: 4.88; 95% CI: 
1.31–18.18].87
These studies did not report data on SAEs. A previous Cochrane 
Review found no significant difference in the proportion of patients 
experiencing AEs or in the rate of withdrawals due to AEs with top-
ical 5-ASA compared with placebo.86 Although the level of evidence 
is very low, our recommendation is strong, based on the long clinical 
experience of efficacy and minimal side effects of rectal formulations 
of 5-ASA along with the low cost of this intervention. It is important 
to consider patient acceptability; for some patients, the use of the 
rectal route for maintenance therapy provides significant advantages 
both in reducing systemic exposure to drugs and avoiding a greater 
level of immunosuppression. However, the rectal route of admin-
istration may present challenges for medication adherence,88 with 
patients facing practical difficulties in administration and enema 
retention. Patient support and education may increase adherence; 
otherwise, alternative formulations or drugs should be considered.
Immunomodulators
We identified four placebo-controlled RCTs on maintenance treatment 
with azathioprine in patients with UC who were steroid-dependent 
or intolerant to 5-ASA [SoF Table 10, available as Supplementary 
data at ECCO-JCC online].78,79,89,90 In 232 patients followed for 
1 year, azathioprine was superior [56%] to placebo [35%] for the 
maintenance of clinical remission [RR: 1.59; 95% CI: 1.19–2.11]. 
No placebo-controlled data on endoscopic or histological remission, 
sustained clinical remission, or SAEs were available. In contrast to 
current clinical trials, different disease activity indices and endpoint 
definitions were used. Hence, indirect comparisons with novel and 
potentially more potent agents are difficult. Nevertheless, large-scale 
cohort studies highlighted the apparent clinical benefit of thiopurine 
monotherapy.91 Since we do not recommend the use of thiopurines for 
induction of remission, it is important that any maintenance strategy 
with thiopurines is planned alongside an effective induction agent. We 
did not identify any RCTs of thiopurines other than azathioprine, but 
due to their closely related pharmacology, we extend our recommen-
dation across the drug class.
Significant safety concerns do exist with the use of thiopurines. 
This is particularly true in patients aged  >65 years; use of thiopurines 
should be discouraged in this age group.8,92–94
No evidence supports the use of methotrexate for the mainten-
ance of remission in UC.95 An RCT of methotrexate against placebo 
failed to demonstrate any advantage in terms of steroid-free clinical 
remission.96
5.  Medical Management of Moderately-to-
severely Active Ulcerative Colitis
5.1.  Induction of remission in moderately-to-
severely active ulcerative colitis
Systemic corticosteroids
Despite a limited evidence base, the use of systemic corticosteroids 
for the induction of remission in moderately-to-severely active UC 
is well established in clinical practice. The limited evidence is due 
in part to the large effect size and limited alternative options at the 
time of the original RCTs.97,98 A previous meta-analysis99 included 
five placebo-controlled RCTs, although only two of them97,98 used 
standard systemic corticosteroids. Therefore, we performed a meta-
analysis of just these two studies and calculated an RR of 2.83 [95% 
CI: 1.79–4.46] for the induction of clinical remission. The quality of 
evidence was rated as very low, due to a serious risk of bias, indirect-
ness, and imprecision [in part since the number of patients included 
in each study was low] [SoF Table 11, available as Supplementary 
data at ECCO-JCC online].
No information regarding AEs with steroid treatment was avail-
able in these two studies. Other studies established the side-effect 
profile of corticosteroids in both short courses and also longer-term 
exposure in both UC and Crohn’s disease.21,100 Due to the potential 
for side effects, some of which are irreversible, corticosteroid-free 
remission represents a desired outcome for patients.101,102
Overall, we believe that the ample experience with systemic ster-
oids in clinical practice and the favourable balance between their po-
tential benefits and harms [when used over limited periods] support 
the recommendation of oral prednisolone [or another equivalent sys-
temic steroid agent, such as methylprednisolone or prednisone] as 
an option for induction of remission in patients with moderately-to-
severely active UC. For these reasons, our recommendation is graded 
as strong, despite the quality of evidence being very low.
A previous meta-analysis identified six RCTs that compared sys-
temic prednisolone with budesonide, and found a significantly higher 
chance of induction of remission but increased steroid-related AEs 
with prednisolone.99 However, none of these RCTs used a colonic-
release budesonide formulation. We restrict our recommendations 
for budesonide MMX in mild-to-moderately active disease, and 
prednisolone in moderately-to-severely active UC, to reflect the 
study populations of the RCTs identified and the likely risk-benefit 
profile in these different populations.
It is important to note that there are no efficacy data supporting 
the use of corticosteroids as maintenance therapies, and very limited 
data on the ability of these drugs to achieve endoscopic response. 
Additionally, longer-term corticosteroid exposure is associated with 
significant safety concerns. Due to this, along with the availability of 
drugs with proven ability to maintain corticosteroid-free remission, 
Recommendation 10
We recommend monotherapy with thiopurines for 
the maintenance of remission in patients with steroid-
dependent UC or who are intolerant to 5-ASA [strong rec-
ommendation, moderate quality of evidence]
Recommendation 11
We recommend oral prednisolone for induction of re-
mission in non-hospitalised patients with moderately-
to-severely active UC [strong recommendation; very low 
quality of evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
9
we advise monitoring of corticosteroid exposure in patients with 
UC. Corticosteroid-sparing agents should be initiated for any pa-
tient showing corticosteroid-refractory disease or intolerance of or 
contraindication to corticosteroids. Additionally, courses of cortico-
steroids should be restricted to a maximum of 3 months, and therapy 
with a corticosteroid-sparing agent should be considered for any pa-
tient who requires more than a single course of systemic corticoster-
oids in a year or experiences a disease flare upon steroid tapering.
Anti-tumour necrosis factor agents
We identified nine suitable RCTs that compared anti-TNF agents 
[infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab] with placebo in patients 
with moderately-to-severely active UC [SoF Table 12, available as 
Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].103–111 Patient eligibility 
required an inadequate response to or intolerance of conventional 
therapies, which were defined as corticosteroids, immunomodulators, 
or both in most studies, although three RCTs also permitted inad-
equate response to or intolerance of oral 5-ASA alone.103–105 Our 
meta-analysis revealed evidence of efficacy for induction of clinical 
remission [RR: 2.23; 95% CI: 1.81–2.76] and clinical response [RR: 
1.56; 95% CI: 1.38–1.76]. We found data supporting efficacy for 
mucosal healing [RR: 1.49; 95% CI: 1.32–1.68], which is closely re-
lated to but defined differently from the outcome of interest used in 
this guideline [endoscopic response]; evidence was therefore down-
graded due to indirectness. There was no difference in terms of AEs 
when analysed regardless of treatment duration [RR: 0.84; 95% 
CI: 0.64–1.09]. Safety data for anti-TNF agents from large cohort 
studies were generally reassuring.93,94,112
Studies that directly compared anti-TNF agents are not avail-
able. Two network meta-analyses113,114 that performed indirect com-
parisons concluded that infliximab is superior to adalimumab for 
the induction of clinical remission [OR: 2.10; 95% CI: 1.21–3.64113 
and OR: 2.10; 95% CI: 1.16–3.79, respectively114]. The first net-
work meta-analysis also concluded that infliximab is superior to 
adalimumab and golimumab for induction of clinical response [OR: 
2.01; 95% CI: 1.36–2.98 and OR: 1.67; 95% CI: 1.08–2.59, vs 
adalimumab and golimumab, respectively] and for induction of mu-
cosal healing [OR: 1.87; 95% CI: 1.26–2.79 and OR: 1.75; 95% CI: 
1.13–2.73, vs adalimumab and golimumab, respectively].113
For patients with a history of previous failure of biologic therapy, 
there are limited data to guide treatment selection. Subgroup ana-
lysis of a phase 3 trial suggests that the clinical effects of induction 
therapy with adalimumab were markedly lower in patients with 
previous anti-TNF agent exposure [and non-significantly different 
from placebo].110 A  previous systematic review of cohort studies 
identified eight studies that reported the efficacy of adalimumab 
when used after infliximab in UC. However, meta-analysis was not 
possible, due to study heterogeneity.115 In patients with a history of 
previous infliximab therapy randomised to either adalimumab or 
vedolizumab, rates of clinical remission and endoscopic response 
were not significantly different.116 There are extremely limited data 
on the use of anti-TNF agents in other biologic sequences.
A key question is whether to combine an anti-TNF agent with an 
immunomodulator. The combination of infliximab with azathioprine 
is more effective than infliximab alone.117 Similar RCT-level data do 
not exist for adalimumab in combination with thiopurine therapy 
in UC, although cohort studies suggest a possible benefit for this 
combination118 and pharmacokinetic benefits have been reported in 
patients with Crohn’s disease.119 For patients experiencing loss of 
response to a first anti-TNF agent used as monotherapy and with 
evidence of anti-drug antibodies, there is clear RCT evidence in fa-
vour of addition of a thiopurine to prevent formation of anti-drug 
antibodies to the second anti-TNF agent.120
The optimal time point for the introduction of anti-TNF therapy 
has yet to be defined. Unlike in Crohn’s disease, no post-hoc analysis 
has demonstrated increased efficacy of anti-TNF agents used early in 
the UC disease course. Factors predicting severe or complicated dis-
ease, such as young age at first diagnosis, extensive disease, and high 
inflammatory burden, have been proposed to identify patients who 
may benefit from early treatment escalation,121 although the benefits 
of this approach have not been demonstrated in any strategy trial.
Vedolizumab
Two placebo-controlled RCTs were identified that addressed our 
PICO question. These included 620 patients with moderately-to-
severely active UC treated with vedolizumab or placebo; induction 
of clinical remission, induction of clinical response, and SAEs were 
reported.122,123 Patients were followed up to 6–10 weeks [SoF Table 
13, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].
We included these two studies in a meta-analysis. Clinical remis-
sion was achieved more often in patients receiving vedolizumab com-
pared with placebo [RR: 2.14; 95% CI:1.03–4.43]. Although the 
direction of effect for clinical response was the same as for clinical 
remission, the difference between patients treated with vedolizumab 
and those receiving placebo was not significant [RR: 1.51; 95% CI: 
0.99–2.29]. Rates of SAEs in patients treated with vedolizumab were 
not significantly different from those receiving placebo [RR: 0.71; 
95% CI: 0.39–1.30]. Safety data from large cohort studies also con-
firmed this favourable safety assessment.112
Evidence was also sought for endoscopic response and biochem-
ical remission; however, data were insufficient. Of note, rates of 
endoscopic remission at Week 6 in the GEMINI I phase 3 induction 
study were 40.9% for vedolizumab-treated patients compared with 
24.8% for placebo-treated patients [p = 0.001].122 In contrast, endo-
scopic remission rates at Week 10 in a Japanese phase 3 induction 
study did not differ significantly between vedolizumab- and placebo-
treated patients [36.6% vs 30.5%, p = 0.32].123
The overall quality of evidence was low. The quality of evidence 
was low for clinical remission due to serious inconsistency and im-
precision. The quality of evidence was moderate for clinical response 
due to serious inconsistency. The inconsistency for both outcomes 
Recommendation 12
We recommend treatment with anti-tumour necrosis factor 
[TNF] agents [infliximab, adalimumab, and golimumab] 
to induce remission in patients with moderate-to-severe 
UC who have inadequate response or intolerance to con-
ventional therapy [strong recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence]
Recommendation 13
We recommend treatment with vedolizumab for the in-
duction of remission in patients with moderately-to-
severely active UC who have inadequate response or 
intolerance to conventional therapy [strong recommen-
dation, low quality of evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
10
T. Raine et al.
was due to heterogeneity in outcomes between the two RCTs. The 
quality of evidence for SAEs was moderate due to serious impreci-
sion. However, the overall recommendation was graded as strong, 
considering the overall evidence available combined with the favour-
able safety profile of vedolizumab in both RCT and cohort studies.
Tofacitinib
We performed a meta-analysis of data from two RCTs relevant to 
our PICO question. These included 1220 patients with moderate-
to-severe UC who previously had an inadequate response, loss 
of response, or were intolerant to either conventional therapy 
[mesalamine plus steroids or thiopurines] or a biologic agent who 
were treated with tofacitinib or placebo [SoF Table 14, available as 
Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].124,125 There was evidence 
for efficacy in induction of clinical response [RR: 1.79; 95% CI: 
1.49–2.14], clinical remission [RR: 3.26; 95% CI: 1.95–5.43], and 
endoscopic response [RR: 5.18; 95% CI: 2.12–12.69]. However, the 
evidence regarding endoscopic response was downgraded due to 
indirectness and imprecision [low number of events]. Data on bio-
chemical remission were insufficient. SAEs were comparable [RR: 
0.70; 95% CI: 0.45–1.08], although the evidence was also down-
graded due to imprecision.
Further safety data are available from post-marketing studies of 
tofacitinib [discussed under maintenance therapy below], which should 
be considered when deciding upon choice of induction therapy. The 
potential benefits of an oral route of administration and the lack of im-
munogenicity should also be considered. A previous meta-analysis of 
RCTs on tofacitinib showed similar positive data for clinical and endo-
scopic endpoints in both the subgroup of patients naïve to anti-TNF 
agents and the subgroup with previous anti-TNF agent exposure.126 
There were no significant differences in estimates of effect sizes between 
these subgroups. This was reflected in the findings of indirect network 
meta-analyses that did not find evidence of a statistical difference be-
tween tofacitinib and anti-TNF agents or ustekinumab for clinical and 
endoscopic outcomes in patients naïve to biologic therapy,113,114 but 
suggest a possible benefit over adalimumab or vedolizumab for pa-
tients with previous anti-TNF agent exposure.114
Ustekinumab
A single RCT compared ustekinumab with placebo for induction 
therapy in patients with moderately-to-severely active UC [SoF 
Table 15, available as Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].127 
Patients were required to have not responded to or been intolerant to 
previous biologic or conventional therapy [defined as corticosteroid 
or thiopurines], or both, or have corticosteroid-dependent disease. 
Of these, 51.1% of randomised patients had previously failed treat-
ment with an alternative biologic, including 16.6% who failed treat-
ment with both an anti-TNF agent and vedolizumab. The study 
demonstrated the benefit of ustekinumab [6 mg/kg] over placebo in 
induction of clinical remission [15.5% vs 5.3%; RR: 2.91; 95% CI: 
1.72–4.94], clinical response [61.8% vs 31.3%; RR: 1.97; 95% CI: 
1.64–2.37], and endoscopic improvement [27.0% vs 13.8%; RR: 
1.96; 95% CI: 1.41–2.72].
At completion of induction, the change in mean Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease Questionnaire [IBDQ] score from baseline was 
greater in those receiving ustekinumab [6 mg/kg] than in those re-
ceiving placebo [35.0 vs 16.16; p <0.001]. Median change in faecal 
calprotectin from baseline also showed a more significant reduction 
in the treatment arm [-1368.26 vs 17.92; p <0.001]. SAEs did not 
differ between ustekinumab [6 mg/kg] and placebo [5.2% vs 7.9%; 
RR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.39–1.17].
Clinical and endoscopic benefit compared with placebo was ob-
served for patients with and without previous biologic failure. An 
indirect network meta-analysis did not reveal a statistical difference 
between ustekinumab and anti-TNF agents or tofacitinib for clin-
ical and endoscopic outcomes in patients naïve to biologic therapy, 
but suggested a possible benefit of ustekinumab over adalimumab or 
vedolizumab for patients with previous anti-TNF exposure.114
5.2.  Maintenance of remission of moderately-to-
severely active ulcerative colitis
Anti-TNF agents
We performed a meta-analysis of data extracted from 10 placebo-
controlled RCTs of anti-TNF agents [infliximab, golimumab, 
adalimumab] for the maintenance of remission in adult patients 
with moderately-to-severely active UC [SoF Table 16, available as 
Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online].103–111,128 Anti-TNF agents 
were effective for the maintenance of clinical remission [RR: 1.98; 95% 
CI: 1.60–2.45], steroid-free clinical remission [RR: 2.86; 95% CI: 1.67–
4.90], improvement in quality of life [QoL] [RR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.27–
2.32], and sustained clinical remission [RR: 2.76; 95% CI: 1.78–4.28]. 
The risk of SAEs was not different between anti-TNF agents and placebo 
[RR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.64–1.09]. Evidence was also sought for endo-
scopic remission and biochemical remission; however, data were insuffi-
cient. Large-scale cohort studies support the safety of these drugs.93,94,112
Recommendation 14
We recommend treatment with tofacitinib to induce re-
mission in patients with moderate-to-severe UC who 
have inadequate response or intolerance to conventional 
therapy [strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence]
Recommendation 15
We recommend treatment with ustekinumab for the induc-
tion of remission in patients with moderately-to-severely 
active UC with inadequate response or intolerance to con-
ventional therapy. [strong recommendation, moderate 
quality of evidence]
Recommendation 16
We recommend anti-TNF agents [infliximab, adalimumab, 
or golimumab] for the maintenance of remission in pa-
tients with UC who responded to induction therapy with 
the same drug [strong recommendation, high-quality 
evidence]
Recommendation 17
In UC patients who have lost response to an anti-TNF 
agent, there is currently insufficient evidence to recom-
mend for or against the use of therapeutic drug moni-
toring to improve clinical outcomes
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
11
Multiple studies have shown an association between trough levels of 
biologic agents, including anti- TNF agents,129–134 vedolizumab,135–137 
and ustekinumab,138 and clinical outcomes in UC. Nonetheless, these 
studies were all retrospective analyses and cannot confirm any causal 
effect or suggest a benefit of trough-level based dose adjustment for 
improvement of response to biologics in patients with persistent dis-
ease activity. Retrospective analyses of mixed cohorts of patients 
with IBD, experiencing loss of response to anti-TNF agents, have 
shown that measurement of adequate infliximab or adalimumab 
drug levels appears to correlate well with patients who do not re-
spond to subsequent dose escalation and to patients who do respond 
to switching to non anti-TNF therapies.139–141 These retrospective 
data suggest that decisions informed by drug monitoring may be 
more likely to be successful than clinically guided decision making 
alone,140 but this requires validation in a prospective study.
The same challenges and arguments around the need to demon-
strate benefit and not just association apply to discussions around the 
use of prospective monitoring of drug levels to guide dosing in patients 
who are not experiencing loss of response. One study, published in ab-
stract only, randomised 371 participants with UC, who had responded 
to induction therapy with adalimumab, to receive adalimumab at 
standard dose [40 mg every other week], high dose [40 mg every week], 
or dosing guided by therapeutic drug monitoring.142 The therapeutic 
drug monitoring arm was not powered to demonstrate superiority 
and was considered exploratory. There was a non-significant trend to-
wards higher rates of clinical remission amongst responders to induc-
tion therapy who were randomised to receive drug monitoring-guided 
dosing compared with standard dose [36.5% vs 29%].
Overall, given the lack of appropriate prospective studies, we 
were unable to make a recommendation [SoF Table 17, available as 
Supplementary data at ECCO-JCC online] and we suggest further 
research in this area.
Vedolizumab
We identified three RCTs that included 441 patients treated with 
intravenous vedolizumab or placebo, which reported on mainten-
ance of clinical remission and sustained clinical remission in adult 
patients with moderately-to-severely active UC who responded to 
induction therapy [SoF Table 18, available as Supplementary data 
at ECCO-JCC online].122,123,143,144 Patients in these trials were fol-
lowed up for 52–60 weeks. We performed a meta-analysis of results 
from these trials. Clinical remission was more common in induction-
responders who subsequently received vedolizumab compared with 
placebo [RR: 2.37; 95% CI: 1.74–3.23]. Likewise, sustained clinical 
remission was also more common in patients receiving vedolizumab 
maintenance therapy compared with placebo [20.7% vs 9.4%; RR: 
2.16; 95% CI: 1.34–3.50]. The quality of evidence for these out-
comes was moderate to high. The rate of SAEs across five studies 
involving 1288 patients was not significantly different between 
vedolizumab and placebo [RR: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.39–1.30]. The 
quality of evidence for this outcome was moderate due to serious 
imprecision arising from sparse data. Nevertheless, the safety profile 
of vedolizumab has been established in a large cohort study.112 In 
particular, the rate of serious infections in patients with UC appeared 
lower in those treated with vedolizumab than with anti-TNF agents, 
after adjusting for baseline differences [including comorbidities].
More recently, a double-dummy placebo-controlled RCT 
evaluated both intravenous and subcutaneous preparations of 
vedolizumab in patients with moderately-to-severely active UC, 
who had responded to open-label intravenous vedolizumab induc-
tion therapy.143 Clinical remission, endoscopic improvement, and 
sustained clinical remission were significantly more frequently ob-
served with subcutaneous vedolizumab than with placebo. The study 
was not powered to compare intravenous and subcutaneous prepar-
ations, although all outcomes were numerically similar between 
these two groups. SAEs occurred at similar frequencies in all three 
groups, and no distinct safety signals were observed with the sub-
cutaneous preparation.
One RCT compared the efficacy and safety of vedolizumab with those 
of adalimumab over a 1-year period in patients with moderately-to-
severely active UC [SoF Table 19, available as Supplementary data 
at ECCO-JCC online].116 A significantly higher percentage of patients 
in the vedolizumab group than in the adalimumab group achieved 
clinical response [RR: 1.46; 95% CI: 1.29‒1.67], clinical remission 
[RR: 1.39; 95% CI: 1.10‒1.76), and endoscopic remission [RR: 
1.43; 95% CI: 1.17‒1.75]. There was a numerical trend in favour 
of vedolizumab for biochemical remission [RR: 1.22; 95% CI: 
0.96‒1.54]. Corticosteroid-free clinical remission occurred in a nu-
merically lower percentage of patients in the vedolizumab group than 
in the adalimumab group [RR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0.32‒1.05]. Of note, 
the quality of evidence for steroid-free clinical remission was low, as 
evidence relied on sparse data and the confidence intervals were very 
wide. Incidence rates of infections and serious infections occurred at 
similar frequencies with vedolizumab and with adalimumab [RR: 
0.80; 95% CI: 0.55‒1.17]. It is important to note that dose escalation 
was not permitted with either drug, despite evidence of improved 
maintenance outcomes with dose escalation for both drugs.122,142,145
Tofacitinib
We identified one RCT that reported outcomes in 593 patients treated 
with tofacitinib or placebo as maintenance therapy.125 For patients 
who responded to induction therapy, tofacitinib at a dose of 5 or 
10 mg twice daily was superior to placebo in maintaining clinical 
remission [RR: 3.37; 95% CI: 2.23–5.10] and endoscopic remission 
[RR: 3.88; 95% CI: 1.90–7.95] in patients with moderate-to-severe 
Recommendation 18
We recommend vedolizumab for maintenance of remis-
sion in patients with UC who responded to induction 
therapy with vedolizumab [strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence]
Recommendation 19
We suggest the use of vedolizumab rather than 
adalimumab for the induction and maintenance of remis-
sion in patients with moderately-to-severely active ulcera-
tive colitis [weak recommendation, low level of evidence]
Recommendation 20
We recommend tofacitinib for maintaining remission in 
patients with UC who responded to induction therapy 
with tofacitinib [strong recommendation, moderate 
quality of evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
12
T. Raine et al.
UC who had an adequate response to the induction scheme. 
However, the evidence regarding endoscopic remission was down-
graded due to imprecision [low number of events]. Sustained clin-
ical remission [RR: 4.71; 95% CI: 2.51–8.84], corticosteroid-free 
remission [RR: 2.54; 95% CI: 1.39–4.65], and improvement in QoL 
[RR: 2.55; 95% CI: 1.93–3.37] were also superior. The evidence re-
garding corticosteroid-free clinical remission was also downgraded 
due to imprecision. Data on biochemical remission were insufficient.
SAEs for tofacitinib therapy in RCTs were comparable to placebo 
[RR: 0.70; 95% CI: 0.45–1.08]. The evidence was again downgraded 
due to imprecision. However, an increased risk for infections was ob-
served [OR: 1.56; 95% CI: 1.18–2.06]. Most of the serious infections 
were of bacterial origin, including community-acquired pneumonia and 
urinary tract and skin infections. A separate meta-analysis of the safety 
profile of Janus kinase inhibitors across multiple inflammatory diseases 
showed a particularly high risk of viral infections, especially herpes 
zoster [RR: 6.53; 95% CI: 0.86–49.58].146 This signal was also observed 
in a pooled analysis of safety data from the tofacitinib development pro-
gramme in UC [incidence rate 4.1 events per 100 person-years; 95% 
CI: 3.1–5.2],147 although most cases were uncomplicated and associated 
with a single dermatome. This risk appears to be dose dependent and is 
more common with 10 mg twice daily dosing than 5 mg twice daily.147 
A large cohort study in rheumatoid arthritis suggested that the rates of 
herpes zoster appear higher with tofacitinib than with anti-TNF agents; 
this risk appeared to be especially significant in older patients or in those 
receiving concomitant corticosteroid therapy.148
A safety study of tofacitinib in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, 
aged ≥50 years and with at least one known cardiovascular risk factor, 
revealed a significantly increased risk of venous thromboembolism 
[VTE] in patients treated with 10 mg twice daily tofacitinib compared 
with patients treated with anti-TNF agents. This risk was not observed 
in patients treated with 5 mg twice daily tofacitinib.149 Although data 
are sparse, VTE has been reported in patients with VTE risk factors 
who participated in the UC development programme.150 Considering 
these findings, the European Medicines Agency recommended using 
tofacitinib at the lowest efficacious dose and avoiding tofacitinib 10 mg 
twice daily as maintenance treatment for patients with known VTE risk 
factors. In this regard, 140 UC patients treated with tofacitinib 10 mg 
twice daily for at least 2 consecutive years, and in sustained remis-
sion for ≥6 months, were randomised to continue with the same dose 
or de-escalate to 5 mg twice daily. After 6 months, clinical remission 
rates were 77% and 90% for the 5 mg twice daily and 10 mg twice 
daily groups, respectively. No differences in AEs or SAEs were detected 
between the two groups, although herpes zoster cases were numeric-
ally higher in the 10 mg twice daily group.151 Further post-marketing 
surveillance data suggest that tofacitinib use is also associated with an 
increased risk of cardiac events and malignancies.152 Overall, we re-
iterate the comments made previously that the efficacy data, including 
in patients with previous anti-TNF exposure, along with the benefits 
associated with oral dosing and lack of immunogenicity, support our 
recommendations for tofacitinib as a treatment option in patients with 
UC, with the risks and benefits to be considered for each patient.
Ustekinumab
A single RCT compared ustekinumab with placebo for maintenance 
therapy in UC in patients who responded to ustekinumab induc-
tion therapy.127 The study revealed that maintenance treatment with 
ustekinumab, at approved dosing of 90 mg subcutaneously every 8 
weeks, offers benefit when compared with placebo in maintenance 
of clinical remission [RR: 1.82; 95% CI: 1.33–2.49] and mainten-
ance of steroid-free clinical remission [RR: 1.79; 95% CI: 1.30–
2.47], at Week 44. Although data were not available for endoscopic 
improvement, we used data for the closely related endpoint of endo-
scopic remission and found benefit compared with placebo [RR: 
1.79; 95% CI: 1.36–2.36]. There was a reduction in mean faecal 
calprotectin for those who remained on ustekinumab during the 
maintenance period [-434.9 vs 813.3]. The benefits of ustekinumab 
were also reflected by the IBDQ scores in patients who completed 
the maintenance study [3.9 vs -15.7]. SAEs did not occur more fre-
quently in the treatment arm [5.2% vs 7.9%; RR: 0.67; 95% CI: 
0.39–1.17].
In addition to 8-weekly dosing, the study also evaluated 
12-weekly maintenance therapy. Twelve-weekly dosing also showed 
statistically significant superiority over placebo for clinical remission 
[RR: 1.60; 95% CI: 1.16–2.21], steroid-free clinical remission [RR: 
1.61; 95% CI: 1.16–2.24], and endoscopic remission [RR: 1.53; 
95% CI: 1.14–2.04]. Compared with 8-weekly dosing, rates were 
numerically lower, but this did not reach statistical significance. The 
differences between outcomes with 8-weekly and 12-weekly dosing 
were greater in patients with a history of previous biologic failure.127
6.  Conclusion
These recommendations summarise the current evidence on the 
medical management of adult patients with UC. Gaps were iden-
tified during the analysis of the data, which should be addressed 
by further research. Where evidence is lacking or is very weak and 
evidence-based recommendations cannot be given, ECCO provides 
alternative tools, such as Topical Reviews28,95,153–158 or Position 
Papers.159–161 It is important that clinicians use these guidelines 
within the framework of local regulations, and seek to understand 
and address the individual needs and expectations of every patient. 
We recognise that constraints on health care resources are an im-
portant factor in determining whether recommendations can be 
implemented for patients in many countries. The recommendations 
outlined here should be used to inform treatment decisions and 
form part of an overall multidisciplinary treatment plan for patients 
with UC, which may also encompass psychological, nutritional, and 
other non-pharmacological interventions. ECCO will disseminate 
these guidelines by educational activities [i.e., educational plat-
forms, ECCO Workshops, e-learning, and e-Guide] and will support 
any initiative to integrate ECCO Guidelines into clinical practice; 
the ECCO e-Guide will primarily serve as a resource to examine 
how the guideline recommendations can be implemented into daily 
clinical practice and patient care pathways.162 The e-Guide ad-
dresses important practical issues not addressed here, such as how 
to monitor for both positive and negative effects of medications. 
These treatment guidelines will be regularly updated according to 
the Guideline Committee schedule for the update of guidelines on 
the ECCO website. Updates will use the GRADE approach and con-
sider the most recent evidence emerging from clinical research in 
the field.
Funding
This project was initiated, funded, and supported by ECCO.
Recommendation 21
We recommend ustekinumab for the maintenance of 
remission in patients with UC who responded to induc-
tion therapy with ustekinumab [strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence]
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
13
Conflict of Interest
ECCO has diligently maintained a disclosure policy of potential conflicts of 
interests [CoI]. The conflict-of-interest declaration is based on a form used by 
the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors [ICMJE]. The CoI 
disclosures are not only stored at the ECCO Office and the editorial office 
of JCC, but are also open to public scrutiny on the ECCO website [https://
www.ecco-ibd.eu/about-ecco/ecco-disclosures.html], providing a comprehen-
sive overview of potential conflicts of interest of the authors.
Disclaimer
The ECCO consensus guidelines are targeted at health care professionals only 
and are based on an international consensus process. Any treatment decisions 
are a matter for the individual clinician and should not be based exclusively 
on the content of the ECCO consensus guidelines. ECCO and/ or any of its 
staff members and/or any consensus contributor may not be held liable for 
any information published in good faith in the ECCO consensus guidelines.
Acknowledgements
We thank: the ECCO Office for logistical and coordination support; Paul 
Freudenberger for the literature search; and Torsten Karge for the support 
on informatics and on the online Guidelines platform. We gratefully thank 
the EFCCA patient representatives Kirsty Gibson [UK], Isabella Grosu 
[Romania], Lucie Lastikova [Czech Republic], Jarkko Lignell [Finland], Edda 
Svavarsdottir [Iceland], Szajer Daria [Poland] who proactively collaborated in 
the development of these Guidelines. 
We would like to thank and acknowledge the ECCO National 
Representatives, who acted as external reviewers and reviewed and provided 
suggestions on the recommendations and supporting text to this document: 
Filiz Akyüz [Turkey], Raja Atreya [Germany], Giorgos Bamias [Greece], Manuel 
Barreiro de Acosta [Spain], Dominik Bettenworth [Germany], Ante Bogut [Bosnia 
and Herzegovina], Garret Cullen [Ireland], Pieter Dewint [Belgium], Mihai 
Mircea Diculescu [Romania], Srdjan Djuranovic [Serbia], Andrey Dorofeyev 
[Ukraine], Pavel Drastich [Czech Republic], Dana Duricová [Czech Republic], 
Pierre Ellul [Malta], Adrian Goldiș [Romania], Ana Gutierrez [Spain], Christoph 
Högenauer [Austria], Tuire Ilus [Finland], Ioannis Kaimakliotis [Cyprus], 
Željko Krznarić [Croatia], Karin Kull [Estonia], Hendrik Laja [Estonia], Triana 
Lobaton [Belgium], Gregor Novak [Slovenia], Małgorzata Sładek [Poland], 
Svetlana Turcan [Moldova], Willemijn van Dop [The Netherlands], Fiona van 
Schaik [The Netherlands], Ana Isabel Vieira [Portugal], Matti Waterman [Israel], 
Signe Wildt [Denmark], Henit Yanai [Israel].
Additionally, we would like to thank our colleagues at the European Society 
of Coloproctology [ESCP], who were invited to participate in the recom-
mendations and statements during the preliminary online vote: Triantafyllos 
Doulias [UK], Mark Ellebæk [Denmark], Gaetano Gallo [Italy], Rosa Jimenez-
Rodriguez [Spain], Ionut Negoi [Romania], Luis Sánchez-Guillén [Spain].
Last, but not least, we would also like to thank and acknowledge the fol-
lowing additional external reviewers who also reviewed and provided sug-
gestions on the recommendations and statements: Mariangela Allocca [Italy], 
Michele Carvello [Italy], Gabriele Dragoni [Belgium], Daniela Gilardi [Italy], 
Jost Langhorst [Germany], Lieven Pouillon [Belgium], Iago Rodríguez-Lago 
[Spain], Simone Saibeni [Italy], Beatriz Sicilia [Spain].
Supplementary Data
Supplementary data are available at ECCO-JCC online.
References 
	1.	 Maaser  C, Sturm  A, Vavricka  SR, et  al. ECCO-ESGAR Guideline for 
Diagnostic Assessment in IBD Part 1: Initial diagnosis, monitoring of known 
IBD, detection of complications. J Crohns Colitis 2019;13:144–64K. 
	2.	 Sturm A, Maaser C, Calabrese E, et al. ECCO-ESGAR guideline for diag-
nostic assessment in IBD part 2: IBD scores and general principles and 
technical aspects. J Crohns Colitis 2019;13:273–84.
	3.	 Magro F, Langner C, Driessen A, et al.; European Society of Pathology 
(ESP); European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). European 
consensus on the histopathology of inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns 
Colitis 2013;7:827–51.
	4.	 Kemp K, Dibley L, Chauhan U, et al. Second N-ECCO consensus state-
ments on the European nursing roles in caring for patients with Crohn’s 
disease or ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2018;12:760–76.
	5.	 Harbord M, Annese V, Vavricka SR, et al.; European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation. The first European evidence-based consensus on extra-
intestinal manifestations in inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 
2016;10:239–54.
	6.	 Annese V, Beaugerie L, Egan L, et al.; ECCO. European evidence-based 
consensus: inflammatory bowel disease and malignancies. J Crohns Colitis 
2015;9:945–65.
	7.	 Dignass  AU, Gasche  C, Bettenworth  D, et  al.; European Crohn’s and 
Colitis Organisation [ECCO]. European consensus on the diagnosis and 
management of iron deficiency and anaemia in inflammatory bowel dis-
eases. J Crohns Colitis 2015;9:211–22.
	8.	 Kucharzik T, Ellul P, Greuter T, et al. ECCO guidelines on the prevention, 
diagnosis, and management of infections in inflammatory bowel disease. J 
Crohns Colitis 2021;15:879–913.
	9.	 Adamina M, Angriman I, Bemelman WA, et al. European evidence based 
consensus on surgery for ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2015. doi: 
10.1016/j.crohns.2014.08.012.
	10.	Burisch J, Katsanos KH, Christodoulou DK, et al. Natural disease course 
of ulcerative colitis during the first five years of follow-up in a European 
population-based inception cohort – an Epi-IBD Study. J Crohns Colitis 
2019;13:198–208.
	11.	Walsh AJ, Bryant RV, Travis SP. Current best practice for disease activity 
assessment in IBD. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;13:567–79.
	12.	Ghosh S, Sensky T, Casellas F, et al. A global, prospective, observational 
study measuring disease burden and suffering in patients with ulcerative 
colitis, using the pictorial representation of illness and self-measure tool. J 
Crohns Colitis 2021;15:228–37.
	13.	Silverberg MS, Satsangi J, Ahmad T, et al. Toward an integrated clinical, 
molecular and serological classification of inflammatory bowel disease: 
report of a Working Party of the 2005 Montreal World Congress of 
Gastroenterology. Can J Gastroenterol 2005;19[Suppl A]:5A–36A.
	14.	Lee HS, Park SH, Yang SK, et al. Long-term prognosis of ulcerative colitis 
and its temporal change between 1977 and 2013: A hospital-based cohort 
study from Korea. J Crohns Colitis 2015;9:147–55.
	15.	Burisch J, Ungaro R, Vind I, et al. Proximal disease extension in patients 
with limited ulcerative colitis: A Danish population-based inception co-
hort. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:1200–4. 
	16.	Schünemann H, Brożek J, Guyatt G, Oxman A. GRADE Handbook for 
Grading Quality of Evidence and Strength of Recommendations. 2013. 
https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html. 
Accessed 
27 
October 2021.
	17.	Fitch K, Bernstein SJ, Aguilar MD, et al. The RAND/UCLA Appropriateness 
Method User’s Manual. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2001. 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1269.html.
	18.	DerSimonian  R, Laird  N. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control Clin 
Trials  1986. doi: 10.1016/0197-2456(86)90046-2.
	19.	Torres J, Billioud V, Sachar DB, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Colombel JF. Ulcerative 
colitis as a progressive disease: the forgotten evidence. Inflamm Bowel Dis 
2012;18:1356–63.
	20.	Sewitch MJ, Abrahamowicz M, Bitton A, et al. Psychological distress, so-
cial support, and disease activity in patients with inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. Am J Gastroenterol 2001. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9270(01)02363-2.
	21.	Lewis JD, Scott FI, Brensinger CM, et al. Increased mortality rates with 
prolonged corticosteroid therapy when compared with antitumor ne-
crosis factor-α-directed therapy for inflammatory bowel disease. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2018;113:405–17.
	22.	Murthy  SK, Begum  J, Benchimol  EI, et  al. Introduction of anti-TNF 
therapy has not yielded expected declines in hospitalisation and intestinal 
resection rates in inflammatory bowel diseases: a population-based inter-
rupted time series study. Gut 2020;69:274–82.
	23.	Lo B, Vind I, Vester-Andersen MK, Bendtsen F, Burisch J. Direct and indirect 
costs of inflammatory bowel disease: ten years of follow-up in a Danish 
population-based inception cohort. J Crohns Colitis 2020;14:53–63.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
14
T. Raine et al.
	24.	Turner  D, Ricciuto  A, Lewis  A, et  al.; International Organization for 
the Study of IBD. STRIDE-II: An Update on the Selecting Therapeutic 
Targets in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (STRIDE) Initiative of the 
International Organization for the Study of IBD (IOIBD): Determining 
Therapeutic Goals for Treat-to-Target strategies in IBD. Gastroenterology 
2021;160:1570–83.
	25.	Leung CM, Tang W, Kyaw M, et al. Endoscopic and histological mucosal 
healing in ulcerative colitis in the first year of diagnosis: results from a 
population-based inception cohort from six countries in Asia. J Crohns 
Colitis 2017;11:1440–8.
	26.	Laharie D, Filippi J, Roblin X, et al. Impact of mucosal healing on long-term 
outcomes in ulcerative colitis treated with infliximab: A multicenter ex-
perience. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013. doi: 10.1111/apt.12289.
	27.	Theede K, Kiszka-Kanowitz M, Nordgaard-Lassen I, Mertz Nielsen A. The 
impact of endoscopic inflammation and mucosal healing on health-related 
quality of life in ulcerative colitis patients. J Crohns Colitis 2015;9:625–32.
	28.	Doherty G, Katsanos KH, Burisch J, et al. European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation topical review on treatment withdrawal [‘exit strategies’] in 
inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 2018;12:17–31.
	29.	Murray  A, Nguyen  TM, Parker  CE, Feagan  BG, MacDonald  JK. Oral 
5-aminosalicylic acid for induction of remission in ulcerative colitis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000543.
pub5.
	30.	Hanauer  SB, Sandborn  WJ, Kornbluth  A, et  al. Delayed-release oral 
mesalamine at 4.8  g/day (800  mg tablet) for the treatment of moder-
ately active ulcerative colitis: the ASCEND II trial. Am J Gastroenterol 
2005;100:2478–85.
	31.	Hanauer  SB, Sandborn  WJ, Dallaire  C, et  al. Delayed-release oral 
mesalamine 4.8 g/day (800 mg tablets) compared with 2.4 g/day (400 mg 
tablets) for the treatment of mildly to moderately active ulcerative colitis: 
The ASCEND I trial. Can J Gastroenterol 2007;21:827–34.
	32.	Sandborn WJ, Regula J, Feagan BG, et al. Delayed-release oral mesalamine 
4.8 g/day (800-mg tablet) is effective for patients with moderately active 
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2009;137:1934–43.e1–3.
	33.	Lichtenstein GR, Ramsey D, Rubin DT. Randomised clinical trial: delayed-
release oral mesalazine 4.8  g/day vs. 2.4  g/day in endoscopic mucosal 
healing–ASCEND I and II combined analysis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2011;33:672–8.
	34.	Kamm MA, Sandborn WJ, Gassull M, et al. Once-daily, high-concentration 
MMX mesalamine in active ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 
2007;132:66–75; quiz 432–3.
	35.	Campieri  M, De  Franchis  R, Bianchi  Porro  G, Ranzi  T, Brunetti  G, 
Barbara L. Mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic acid) suppositories in the treat-
ment of ulcerative proctitis or distal proctosigmoiditis. A randomized con-
trolled trial. Scand J Gastroenterol 1990;25:663–8.
	36.	Campieri  M, Gionchetti  P, Belluzzi  A, et  al. Topical treatment with 
5-aminosalicylic in distal ulcerative colitis by using a new suppository 
preparation. A double-blind placebo controlled trial. Int J Colorectal Dis 
1990;5:79–81.
	37.	Campieri M, Gionchetti P, Belluzzi A, et al. Sucralfate, 5-aminosalicylic 
acid and placebo enemas in the treatment of distal ulcerative-colitis. Eur J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 1991;3:41–4.
	38.	Campieri  M, Gionchetti  P, Belluzzi  A, et  al. Optimum dosage of 
5-aminosalicylic acid as rectal enemas in patients with active ulcerative 
colitis. Gut 1991;32:929–31.
	39.	Hanauer  SB. Dose-ranging study of mesalamine (PENTASA) enemas 
in the treatment of acute ulcerative proctosigmoiditis: Results of a 
multicentered placebo-controlled trial. Inflamm Bowel Dis 1998. doi: 
10.1097/00054725-199805000-00001.
	40.	Möller C, Kiviluoto O, Santavirta S, Holtz A. Local treatment of ulcerative 
proctitis with salicylazosulphapyridine (Salazopyrin) enema. Clin Trials J 
1978;15:199–203.
	41.	Pokrotnieks  J, Marlicz  K, Paradowski  L, Margus  B, Zaborowski  P, 
Greinwald  R. Efficacy and tolerability of mesalazine foam enema 
(Salofalk foam) for distal ulcerative colitis: A  double-blind, random-
ized, placebo-controlled study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2000. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2036.2000.00784.x.
	42.	Williams  CN, Haber  G, Aquino  JA. Double-blind, placebo-controlled 
evaluation of 5-ASA suppositories in active distal proctitis and measure-
ment of extent of spread using 99mTc-labeled 5-ASA suppositories. Dig 
Dis Sci 1987;32:71–5S.
	43.	Marteau  P, Probert  CS, Lindgren  S, et  al. Combined oral and enema 
treatment with Pentasa (mesalazine) is superior to oral therapy alone in 
patients with extensive mild/moderate active ulcerative colitis: A random-
ised, double blind, placebo controlled study. Gut 2005. doi: 10.1136/
gut.2004.060103.
	44.	Vecchi  M, Meucci  G, Gionchetti  P, et  al. Oral versus combination 
mesalazine therapy in active ulcerative colitis: a double-blind, double-
dummy, randomized multicentre study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2001;15:251–6.
	45.	Frühmorgen  P, Demling  L. On the efficacy of ready-made-up commer-
cially available salicylazosulphapyridine enemas in the treatment of proc-
titis, proctosigmoiditis and ulcerative colitis involving rectum, sigmoid and 
descending colon. Hepatogastroenterology 1980;27:473–6.
	46.	Safdi  M, DeMicco  M, Sninsky  C, et  al. A double-blind comparison 
of oral versus rectal mesalamine versus combination therapy in the 
treatment of distal ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 1997. doi: 
10.1016/0016-5085(95)27940–7.
	47.	Marshall JK, Irvine EJ. Rectal corticosteroids versus alternative treatments 
in ulcerative colitis: a meta-analysis. Gut 1997;40:775–81.
	48.	De Cassan C, Fiorino G, Danese S. Second-generation corticosteroids for 
the treatment of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis: more effective and 
less side effects? Dig Dis 2012;30:368–75.
	49.	Rubin DT, Sandborn WJ, Bosworth B, et al. Budesonide foam has a favor-
able safety profile for inducing remission in mild-to-moderate ulcerative 
proctitis or proctosigmoiditis. Dig Dis Sci 2015;60:3408–17.
	50.	Cohen RD, Dalal SR. Systematic review: rectal therapies for the treatment 
of distal forms of ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:1719–36.
	51.	Christophi  GP, Rengarajan  A, Ciorba  MA. Rectal budesonide and 
mesalamine formulations in active ulcerative proctosigmoiditis: ef-
ficacy, tolerance, and treatment approach. Clin Exp Gastroenterol 
2016;9:125–30.
	52.	Zeng J, Lv L, Mei ZC. Budesonide foam for mild to moderate distal ul-
cerative colitis: A  systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2017. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13604.
	53.	Cohen RD, Weisshof R. A comprehensive review of topical therapies for 
distal ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;16:21–7.
	54.	Watkinson G. Treatment of ulcerative colitis with topical hydrocortisone 
hemisuccinate sodium. BMJ 1958. doi: 10.1136/bmj.2.5104.1077.
	55.	Lennard-Jones JE, Baron JH, Connell AM, Jones FA. A double blind con-
trolled trial of prednisolone-21-phosphate suppositories in the treatment 
of idiopathic proctitis. Gut 1962. doi: 10.1136/gut.3.3.207.
	56.	Danielsson Å, Löfberg R, Persson T, et al. A steroid enema, budesonide, 
lacking systemic effects for the treatment of distal ulcerative colitis or proc-
titis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1992. doi: 10.3109/00365529209011158.
	57.	Hanauer SB, Robinson M, Pruitt R, et al. Budesonide enema for the treat-
ment of active, distal ulcerative colitis and proctitis: A dose-ranging study. 
Gastroenterology 1998. doi: 10.1016/S0016-5085(98)70131–3.
	58.	Sandborn  WJ, Bosworth  B, Zakko  S, et  al. Budesonide foam induces 
remission in patients with mild to moderate ulcerative proctitis and ul-
cerative proctosigmoiditis. Gastroenterology 2015. doi: 10.1053/j.
gastro.2015.01.037.
	59.	Porro GB, Ardizzone S, Petrillo M, Fasoli A, Molteni P, Imbesi V. Low 
Pentasa dosage versus hydrocortisone in the topical treatment of active 
ulcerative colitis: a randomized, double-blind study. Am J Gastroenterol 
1995. doi: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.1995.tb09309.x.
	60.	Senagore  AJ, MacKeigan  JM, Scheider  M, Ebrom  JS. Short-chain fatty 
acid enemas: a cost-effective alternative in the treatment of nonspecific 
proctosigmoiditis. Dis Colon Rectum 1992;35:923–7.
	61.	Farup PG, Hovde O, Halvorsen FA, Raknerud N, Brodin U. Mesalazine 
suppositories versus hydrocortisone foam in patients with distal ul-
cerative colitis:a comparison of the efficacy and practicality of 
two topical treatment regimens. Scand J Gastroenterol 1995. doi: 
10.3109/00365529509093256.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
15
	62.	Danish 5-ASA Group. Topical 5-aminosalicylic acid versus prednisolone in 
ulcerative proctosigmoiditis. A randomized, double-blind multicenter trial. 
Dig Dis Sci 1987;32:598–602.
	63.	Biancone  L, Gionchetti  P, Blanco  Gdel  V, et  al. Beclomethasone 
dipropionate versus mesalazine in distal ulcerative colitis: a multicenter, 
randomized, double-blind study. Dig Liver Dis 2007;39:329–37.
	64.	Friedman  LS, Richter  JM, Kirkham  SE, DeMonaco  HJ, May  RJ. 
5-Aminosalicylic acid enemas in refractory distal ulcerative colitis: a ran-
domized, controlled trial. Am J Gastroenterol 1986;81:412–8.
	65.	Gionchetti P, D’Arienzo A, Rizzello F, et al.; Italian BDP Study Group. 
Topical treatment of distal active ulcerative colitis with beclomethasone 
dipropionate or mesalamine: a single-blind randomized controlled trial. J 
Clin Gastroenterol 2005;39:291–7.
	66.	Hartmann  F, Stein  J; BudMesa-Study Group. Clinical trial: controlled, 
open, randomized multicentre study comparing the effects of treat-
ment on quality of life, safety and efficacy of budesonide or mesalazine 
enemas in active left-sided ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2010;32:368–76.
	67.	Lee FI, Jewell DP, Mani V, et al. A randomised trial comparing mesalazine 
and prednisolone foam enemas in patients with acute distal ulcerative col-
itis. Gut 1996. doi: 10.1136/gut.38.2.229.
	68.	Lémann M, Galian A, Rutgeerts P, et al. Comparison of budesonide and 
5-aminosalicylic acid enemas in active distal ulcerative colitis. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 1995. doi: 10.1111/j.1365–2036.1995.tb00421.x.
	69.	Mulder  CJ, Fockens  P, Meijer  JW, van  der  Heide  H, Wiltink  EH, 
Tytgat GN. Beclomethasone dipropionate (3 mg) versus 5-aminosalicylic 
acid (2 g) versus the combination of both (3 mg/2 g) as retention en-
emas in active ulcerative proctitis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
1996;8:549–53.
	70.	Mulder  CJJ, Tytgat  GNJ, Wiltink  EHH, Houthoff  HJ. Comparison of 
5-aminosalicylic acid (3  g) and prednisolone phosphate sodium en-
emas (30 mg) in the treatment of distal ulcerative colitis: A prospective, 
randomized, double-blind trial. Scand J Gastroenterol 1988. doi: 
10.3109/00365528809090161.
	71.	Campieri M, Lanfranchi GA, Bazzocchi G, et al. Treatment of ulcerative 
colitis with high-dose 5-aminosalicylic acid enemas. Lancet 1981. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(81)90523–7.
	72.	Danish 5-ASA Group. Topical 5-aminosalicylic acid versus prednisolone in 
ulcerative proctosigmoiditis. A randomized, double-blind multicenter trial. 
Dig Dis Sci 1987. doi: 10.1007/BF01296159.
	73.	Sandborn WJ, Travis S, Moro L, et al. Once-daily budesonide MMX® 
extended-release tablets induce remission in patients with mild to mod-
erate ulcerative colitis: results from the CORE I study. Gastroenterology 
2012;143:1218–26.e2.
	74.	Travis SPL, Danese S, Kupcinskas L, et al. Once-daily budesonide MMX 
in active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis: Results from the randomised 
CORE II study. Gut 2014. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012–304258.
	75.	Therapeutic Goods Administration. Extract from: Clinical Evaluation 
Report for Budesonide. https://www.tga.gov.au/sites/default/files/auspar-
budesonide-160111-cer.pdf. Accessed 27 October 2021.
	76.	Sandborn  WJ, Danese  S, D’Haens  G, et  al. Induction of clinical and 
colonoscopic remission of mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis with 
budesonide MMX 9 mg: Pooled analysis of two phase 3 studies. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther  2015. doi: 10.1111/apt.13076.
	77.	Rubin  DT, Cohen  RD, Sandborn  WJ, et  al. Budesonide multimatrix 
is efficacious for mesalamine-refractory, mild to moderate ulcera-
tive colitis: a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. J Crohns Colitis 
2017;11:785–91.
	78.	Jewell DP, Truelove SC. Azathioprine in ulcerative colitis: final report on 
controlled therapeutic trial. Br Med J 1974;4:627–30.
	79.	Sood A, Midha V, Sood N, Kaushal V. Role of azathioprine in severe ul-
cerative colitis: One-year, placebo- controlled, randomized trial. Indian J 
Gastroenterol  2000;19:14–6.
	80.	Miner  P, Hanauer  S, Robinson  M, Schwartz  J, Arora  S. Safety and ef-
ficacy of controlled-release mesalamine for maintenance of remission in 
ulcerative colitis. Pentasa UC Maintenance Study Group. Dig Dis Sci 
1995;40:296–304.
	81.	Qiu  X, Ma  J, Wang  K, Zhang  H. Chemopreventive effects of 
5-aminosalicylic acid on inflammatory bowel disease-associated colorectal 
cancer and dysplasia: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Oncotarget 
2017. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13715.
	82.	D’Albasio  G, Paoluzi  P, Campieri  M, et  al. Maintenance treatment 
of ulcerative proctitis with mesalazine suppositories: A  double-blind 
placebo-controlled trial. Am J Gastroenterol 1998. doi: 10.1016/
S0002-9270(98)00108-7.
	83.	D’Arienzo  A, Panarese  A, D’Armiento  FP, et  al. 5-Aminosalicylic acid 
suppositories in the maintenance of remission in idiopathic proctitis or 
proctosigmoiditis: a double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J 
Gastroenterol 1990;85:1079–82.
	84.	Hanauer S, Good LI, Goodman MW, et al. Long-term use of mesalamine 
(Rowasa) suppositories in remission maintenance of ulcerative proctitis. 
Am J Gastroenterol 2000. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9270(00)00977-1.
	85.	Marteau P, Crand J, Foucault M, Rambaud JC. Use of mesalazine slow 
release suppositories 1  g three times per week to maintain remission 
of ulcerative proctitis: a randomised double blind placebo controlled 
multicentre study. Gut 1998;42:195–9.
	86.	Marshall JK, Thabane M, Steinhart AH, Newman JR, Anand A, Irvine EJ. 
Rectal 5-aminosalicylic acid for maintenance of remission in ulcerative 
colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;11:CD004118.
	87.	Biddle  WL, Greenberger  NJ, Swan  JT, McPhee  MS, Miner  PB. 
5-Aminosalicylic acid enemas: Effective agent in maintaining re-
mission in left-sided ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1988. doi: 
10.1016/0016-5085(88)90569-0.
	88.	D’Incà  R, Bertomoro  P, Mazzocco  K, Vettorato  MG, Rumiati  R, 
Sturniolo GC. Risk factors for non-adherence to medication in inflamma-
tory bowel disease patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2008;27:166–72.
	89.	Hawthorne AB, Logan RF, Hawkey CJ, et al. Randomised controlled trial 
of azathioprine withdrawal in ulcerative colitis. BMJ 1992;305:20–2.
	90.	Sood A, Kaushal V, Midha V, Bhatia KL, Sood N, Malhotra V. The benefi-
cial effect of azathioprine on maintenance of remission in severe ulcerative 
colitis. J Gastroenterol 2002;37:270–4.
	91.	Stournaras  E, Qian  W, Pappas  A, et  al.; UK IBD BioResource 
Investigators. Thiopurine monotherapy is effective in ulcerative col-
itis but significantly less so in Crohn’s disease: long-term outcomes for 
11 928 patients in the UK inflammatory bowel disease bioresource. Gut 
2021;70:677–86.
	92.	Beaugerie  L, Brousse  N, Bouvier  AM, et  al. Lymphoproliferative dis-
orders in patients receiving thiopurines for inflammatory bowel disease: 
a prospective observational cohort study. Lancet 2009. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(09)61302–7.
	93.	Kirchgesner J, Lemaitre M, Carrat F, Zureik M, Carbonnel F, Dray-Spira R. 
Risk of serious and opportunistic infections associated with treatment of 
inflammatory bowel diseases. Gastroenterology 2018;155:337–46.e10.
	94.	Lemaitre M, Kirchgesner J, Rudnichi A, et al. Association between use of 
thiopurines or tumor necrosis factor antagonists alone or in combination 
and risk of lymphoma in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. JAMA 
2017;318:1679–86.
	95.	Raine T, Verstockt B, Kopylov U, et al. ECCO topical review: Refractory 
IBD. J Crohns Colitis 2021;15:1605–20.
	96.	Herfarth H, Barnes EL, Valentine JF, et al.; Clinical Research Alliance of 
the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation. Methotrexate is not superior to pla-
cebo in maintaining steroid-free response or remission in ulcerative colitis. 
Gastroenterology 2018;155:1098–108.e9.
	97.	Truelove SC, Horler AR, Richards WC. Serial biopsy in ulcerative colitis. 
Br Med J 1955;2:1590–3.
	98.	Lennard-Jones  JE, Longmore  AJ, Newell  AC, Wilson  CW, Jones  FA. 
An assessment of prednisone, salazopyrin, and topical hydrocortisone 
hemisuccinate used as out-patient treatment for ulcerative colitis. Gut 
1960. doi: 10.1136/gut.1.3.217.
	99.	Ford AC, Bernstein CN, Khan KJ, et al. Glucocorticosteroid therapy in 
inflammatory bowel disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2011. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2011.70.
	100.	Schoon  EJ, Bollani  S, Mills  PR, et  al. Bone mineral density in rela-
tion to efficacy and side effects of budesonide and prednisolone in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
16
T. Raine et al.
Crohn’s disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005. doi: 10.1016/
S1542-3565(04)00662-7.
	101.	Hall NJ, Rubin GP, Hungin AP, Dougall A. Medication beliefs among 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease who report low quality of life: 
a qualitative study. BMC Gastroenterol 2007;7:20.
	102.	Westwood N, Travis SP. Review article: what do patients with inflam-
matory bowel disease want for their clinical management? Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2008;27[Suppl 1]:1–8.
	103.	Rutgeerts  P, Sandborn  WJ, Feagan  BG, et  al. Infliximab for induc-
tion and maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 
2005;353:2462–76.
	104.	Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, Marano C, et al. Subcutaneous golimumab 
induces clinical response and remission in patients with moderate-
to-severe ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2014. doi: 10.1053/j.
gastro.2013.05.048.
	105.	Hibi T, Imai Y, Senoo A, Ohta K, Ukyo Y. Efficacy and safety of golimumab 
52-week maintenance therapy in Japanese patients with moderate to 
severely active ulcerative colitis: a phase 3, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled study-(PURSUIT-J study). J Gastroenterol 2017. doi: 
10.1007/s00535-017-1326-1.
	106.	Kobayashi T, Suzuki Y, Motoya S, et al. First trough level of infliximab 
at week 2 predicts future outcomes of induction therapy in ulcerative 
colitis—results from a multicenter prospective randomized controlled 
trial and its post hoc analysis. J Gastroenterol 2016. doi: 10.1007/
s00535-015-1102-z.
	107.	Jiang XL, Cui HF, Gao J, Fan H. Low-dose infliximab for induction and 
maintenance treatment in Chinese patients with moderate to severe ac-
tive ulcerative colitis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2015;49:582–8.
	108.	Reinisch W, Sandborn WJ, Hommes DW, et al. Adalimumab for induc-
tion of clinical remission in moderately to severely active ulcerative col-
itis: Results of a randomised controlled trial. Gut 2011. doi: 10.1136/
gut.2010.221127.
	109.	Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, Marano C, et al. Subcutaneous golimumab 
maintains clinical response in patients with moderate-to-severe ulcerative 
colitis. Gastroenterology 2014. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.06.010.
	110.	Sandborn WJ, Van Assche G, Reinisch W, et al. Adalimumab induces and 
maintains clinical remission in patients with moderate-to-severe ulcera-
tive colitis. Gastroenterology 2012. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.10.032.
	111.	Suzuki Y, Motoya S, Hanai H, et al. Efficacy and safety of adalimumab 
in Japanese patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. 
J Gastroenterol 2014;49:283–94.
	112.	Kirchgesner J, Desai RJ, Beaugerie L, Schneeweiss S, Kim SC. Risk of 
serious infections with vedolizumab versus tumor necrosis factor antag-
onists in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.12.030.
	113.	Bonovas  S, Lytras  T, Nikolopoulos  G, Peyrin-Biroulet  L, Danese  S. 
Editorial: tofacitinib and biologics for moderate-to-severe ulcerative 
colitis-what is best in class? Authors’ reply. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2018;47:540–1.
	114.	Singh  S, Murad  MH, Fumery  M, Dulai  PS, Sandborn  WJ. First- and 
second-line pharmacotherapies for patients with moderate to se-
verely active ulcerative colitis: an updated network meta-analysis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.01.008.
	115.	Gisbert JP, Marín AC, McNicholl AG, Chaparro M. Systematic review 
with meta-analysis: The efficacy of a second anti-TNF in patients with in-
flammatory bowel disease whose previous anti-TNF treatment has failed. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015. doi: 10.1111/apt.13083.
	116.	Sands BE, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Loftus EV Jr, et al.; VARSITY Study Group. 
Vedolizumab versus adalimumab for moderate-to-severe ulcerative col-
itis. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1215–26.
	117.	Panaccione R, Ghosh S, Middleton S, et al. Combination therapy with 
infliximab and azathioprine is superior to monotherapy with either agent 
in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2014;146:392–400.e3.
	118.	Targownik  LE, Benchimol  EI, Bernstein  CN, et  al. Combined bio-
logic and immunomodulatory therapy is superior to monotherapy for 
decreasing the risk of inflammatory bowel disease-related complications. 
J Crohns Colitis 2020;14:1354–63.
	119.	Kennedy NA, Heap GA, Green HD, et al. Predictors of anti-TNF treat-
ment failure in anti-TNF-naive patients with active luminal Crohn’s 
disease: a prospective, multicentre, cohort study. Lancet Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2019. doi: 10.1016/S2468-1253(19)30012–3.
	120.	Roblin X, Williet N, Boschetti G, et al. Addition of azathioprine to the 
switch of anti-TNF in patients with IBD in clinical relapse with undetect-
able anti-TNF trough levels and antidrug antibodies: a prospective ran-
domised trial. Gut 2020;69:1206–12.
	121.	Peyrin-Biroulet L, Panés J, Sandborn WJ, et al. Defining disease severity 
in inflammatory bowel diseases: current and future directions. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2015.06.001.
	122.	Feagan  BG, Rutgeerts  P, Sands  BE, et  al.; GEMINI 1 Study Group. 
Vedolizumab as induction and maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. 
N Engl J Med 2013;369:699–710.
	123.	Motoya S, Watanabe K, Ogata H, et al. Vedolizumab in Japanese patients 
with ulcerative colitis: A  Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. PLoS One 2019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212989.
	124.	Sandborn WJ, Ghosh S, Panes J, et al. Tofacitinib, an oral Janus kinase 
inhibitor, in active ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2012;367:616–24. 
	125.	Sandborn WJ, Su C, Panes J. Tofacitinib as induction and maintenance 
therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2017;377:496–7.
	126.	Paschos P, Katsoula A, Giouleme O, et al. Tofacitinib for induction of 
remission in ulcerative colitis: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann 
Gastroenterol 2018;31:572–82.
	127.	Sands BE, Sandborn WJ, Panaccione R, et al. Ustekinumab as induction 
and maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 2019. doi: 
10.1056/nejmoa1900750.
	128.	Janssen Research & Development. Clinical Study Report Synopsis 
[Protocol 
REMICADEUCO3001; 
Phase 
3]. 
Xi’an 
Janssen 
Pharmaceutical Ltd; 2014.
	129.	Ungar B, Mazor Y, Weisshof R, et al. Induction infliximab levels among 
patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis compared with patients with 
moderately severe ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016. doi: 
10.1111/apt.13631.
	130.	Papamichael K, Baert F, Tops S, et al. Post-induction adalimumab con-
centration is associated with short-term mucosal healing in patients with 
ulcerative colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:53–9.
	131.	Papamichael  K, Vande  Casteele  N, Ferrante  M, Gils  A, Cheifetz  AS. 
Therapeutic drug monitoring during induction of anti-tumor necrosis 
factor therapy in inflammatory bowel disease: defining a therapeutic 
drug window. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2017;23:1510–5.
	132.	Papamichael  K, Van  Stappen  T, Vande  Casteele  N, et  al. Infliximab 
concentration thresholds during induction therapy are associated with 
short-term mucosal healing in patients with ulcerative Colitis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:543–9.
	133.	Gibson DJ, Ward MG, Rentsch C, et al. Review article: determination of 
the therapeutic range for therapeutic drug monitoring of adalimumab 
and infliximab in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2020;51:612–28.
	134.	Adedokun  OJ, Sandborn  WJ, Feagan  BG, et  al. Association between 
serum concentration of infliximab and efficacy in adult patients with ul-
cerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2014;147:1296–307.e5.
	135.	Ungar B, Kopylov U, Yavzori M, et al. Association of vedolizumab level, 
anti-drug antibodies, and α4β7 occupancy with response in patients with 
inflammatory bowel diseases. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:697–
705.e7.
	136.	Pouillon  L, Rousseau  H, Busby-Venner  H, et  al. Vedolizumab trough 
levels and histological healing during maintenance therapy in ulcerative 
colitis. J Crohns Colitis 2019;13:970–5.
	137.	Osterman MT, Rosario M, Lasch K, et al. Vedolizumab exposure levels 
and clinical outcomes in ulcerative colitis: determining the potential for 
dose optimisation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2019;49:408–18.
	138.	Adedokun OJ, Xu Z, Marano C, et al. Ustekinumab pharmacokinetics 
and exposure response in a phase 3 randomized trial of patients with ul-
cerative colitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;18:2244–55.e9.
	139.	Yanai H, Lichtenstein L, Assa A, et al. Levels of drug and antidrug anti-
bodies are associated with outcome of interventions after loss of response 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis
17
to infliximab or adalimumab. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13:522–
30.e2.
	140.	Kelly  OB, Donnell  SO, Stempak  JM, Steinhart  AH, Silverberg  MS. 
Therapeutic drug monitoring to guide infliximab dose adjustment 
is associated with better endoscopic outcomes than clinical decision 
making alone in active inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 
2017;23:1202–9.
	141.	Roblin X, Rinaudo M, Del Tedesco E, et al. Development of an algorithm 
incorporating pharmacokinetics of adalimumab in inflammatory bowel 
diseases. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109:1250–6.
	142.	Colombel JF, Panés J, D’Haens G, et al. Higher vs. standard adalimumab 
maintenance regimens in patients with moderately to severely active 
ulcerative colitis: Results from the SERENE-UC maintenance study. J 
Crohns Colitis  2020;14[Suppl 1]:S001. 
	143.	Sandborn WJ, Baert F, Danese S, et al. Efficacy and safety of vedolizumab 
subcutaneous formulation in a randomized trial of patients with ulcera-
tive colitis. Gastroenterology 2020;158:562–72.e12.
	144.	Feagan BG, Patel H, Colombel JF, et al. Effects of vedolizumab on health-
related quality of life in patients with ulcerative colitis: results from 
the randomised GEMINI 1 trial. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017. doi: 
10.1111/apt.13852.
	145.	Wolf D, D’Haens G, Sandborn WJ, et al. Escalation to weekly dosing 
recaptures response in adalimumab-treated patients with moderately 
to severely active ulcerative colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014. doi: 
10.1111/apt.12863.
	146.	Olivera PA, Lasa JS, Bonovas S, Danese S, Peyrin-Biroulet L. Safety of 
Janus kinase inhibitors in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases or 
other immune-mediated diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Gastroenterology 2020;158:1554–73.e12.
	147.	Sandborn WJ, Panés J, D’Haens GR, et al. Safety of tofacitinib for treat-
ment of ulcerative colitis, based on 4.4 years of data from global clinical 
trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2018.11.035.
	148.	Curtis JR, Xie F, Yun H, Bernatsky S, Winthrop KL. Real-world com-
parative risks of herpes virus infections in tofacitinib and biologic-treated 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2016. doi: 10.1136/
annrheumdis-2016–209131.
	149.	Pharmacovigilance 
Risk 
Assessment 
Committee 
(PRAC). 
EMA/631064/2019. Publisher European Medicines Agency; 2019.
	150.	Sandborn WJ, Panés J, Sands BE, et al. Venous thromboembolic events 
in the tofacitinib ulcerative colitis clinical development programme. 
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2019;50:1068–76.
	151.	Vermeire S, Su C, Lawendy N, et al. Outcomes of tofacitinib dose re-
duction in patients with ulcerative colitis in stable remission from the 
randomised RIVETING Trial. J Crohns Colitis 2021;15:1130–41.
	152.	European Medicines Agency. Xeljanz (tofacitinib): Initial Clinical Trial 
Results of Increased Risk of Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events 
and Malignancies (Excluding NMSC) with Use of Tofacitinib Relative 
to TNF-alpha Inhibitors. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/
dhpc/direct-healthcare-professional-communication-dhpc-xeljanz-
tofacitinib-initial-clinical-trial-results_en.pdf Accessed September 27, 
2021.
	153.	Adamina  M, Gerasimidis  K, Sigall-Boneh  R, et  al. Perioperative 
dietary therapy in inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 
2020;14:431–44.
	154.	Torres  J, Ellul  P, Langhorst  J, et  al. European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation topical review on complementary medicine and psy-
chotherapy in inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 
2019;13:673–85e.
	155.	Sigall-Boneh  R, Levine  A, Lomer  M, et  al. Research gaps in diet 
and nutrition in inflammatory bowel disease. a topical review by 
D-ECCO Working Group [Dietitians of ECCO]. J Crohns Colitis 
2017;11:1407–19.
	156.	Maaser C, Langholz E, Gordon H, et al. European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation topical review on environmental factors in IBD. J Crohns 
Colitis 2017;11:905–20.
	157.	van Rheenen PF, Aloi M, Biron IA, et al. European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation topical review on transitional care in inflammatory bowel 
disease. J Crohns Colitis 2017;11:1032–8.
	158.	Sturm  A, Maaser  C, Mendall  M, et  al. European Crohn’s and Colitis 
Organisation topical review on IBD in the elderly. J Crohns Colitis 
2017;11:263–73.
	159.	Fiorino G, Lytras T, Younge L, et al. Quality of care standards in inflam-
matory bowel diseases: a European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation 
[ECCO] Position Paper. J Crohns Colitis 2020;14:1037–48.
	160.	Magro  F, Doherty  G, Peyrin-Biroulet  L, et  al. ECCO position paper: 
Harmonization of the approach to ulcerative colitis histopathology. J 
Crohns Colitis 2020;14:1503–11.
	161.	Danese S, Fiorino G, Raine T, et al. ECCO position statement on the 
use of biosimilars for inflammatory bowel disease-an update. J Crohns 
Colitis  2017;11:26–34.
	162.	ECCO. European Crohn’s Colitis Organisation ECCO e-Guide. http://
www.e-guide.ecco-ibd.eu. Accessed 27 October 2021.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ecco-jcc/article/16/1/2/6390052 by E-Library Insel user on 29 June 2023
