Cell Host & Microbe
Resource
The Treatment-Naive Microbiome
in New-Onset Crohn’s Disease
Dirk Gevers,1 Subra Kugathasan,4,24 Lee A. Denson,5,24 Yoshiki Va´ zquez-Baeza,6 Will Van Treuren,7 Boyu Ren,8
Emma Schwager,8 Dan Knights,9,10 Se Jin Song,7 Moran Yassour,1 Xochitl C. Morgan,8 Aleksandar D. Kostic,1
Chengwei Luo,1 Antonio Gonza´ lez,7 Daniel McDonald,7 Yael Haberman,5 Thomas Walters,11 Susan Baker,12 Joel Rosh,13
Michael Stephens,14 Melvin Heyman,15 James Markowitz,16 Robert Baldassano,17 Anne Grifﬁths,18 Francisco Sylvester,19
David Mack,20 Sandra Kim,21 Wallace Crandall,21 Jeffrey Hyams,19 Curtis Huttenhower,1,8 Rob Knight,7,22,23
and Ramnik J. Xavier1,2,3,*
1Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
2Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
3Center for Computational and Integrative Biology
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA
4Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
5Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
6Department of Computer Science
7BioFrontiers Institute
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
8Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA
9Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55108, USA
10BioTechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
11Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada
12Children’s Hospital of Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14222, USA
13Goryeb Children’s Hospital, Morristown, NJ 07960, USA
14Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902, USA
15University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
16North Shore Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New Hyde Park, NY 11040, USA
17Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
18Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada
19Connecticut Children’s Medical Center, Hartford, CT 06106, USA
20Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L1 Canada
21Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH 43228, USA
22Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
23Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
24These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2014.02.005
SUMMARY
Inﬂammatory
bowel
diseases
(IBDs),
including
Crohn’s disease (CD), are genetically linked to host
pathways that implicate an underlying role for aber-
rant immune responses to intestinal microbiota.
However, patterns of gut microbiome dysbiosis in
IBD patients are inconsistent among published
studies. Using samples from multiple gastrointes-
tinal locations collected prior to treatment in new-
onset cases, we studied the microbiome in the
largest pediatric CD cohort to date. An axis deﬁned
by
an increased abundance in bacteria which
include Enterobacteriaceae, Pasteurellacaea, Veillo-
nellaceae, and Fusobacteriaceae, and decreased
abundance in Erysipelotrichales, Bacteroidales, and
Clostridiales, correlates strongly with disease status.
Microbiome comparison between CD patients with
and without antibiotic exposure indicates that anti-
biotic use ampliﬁes the microbial dysbiosis associ-
ated with CD. Comparing the microbial signatures
between the ileum, the rectum, and fecal samples
indicates that at this early stage of disease, assess-
ing the rectal mucosal-associated microbiome offers
unique potential for convenient and early diagnosis
of CD.
INTRODUCTION
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a complex disease in which
genetic and environmental circuits establish and contribute to
disease pathogenesis. Recent large-scale genome-wide asso-
ciation studies link IBD to host-microbe pathways central to
sensing/signaling and mucosal-initiated effector responses (Jos-
tins et al., 2012). Studies of the intestinal gut microbiota imply
that an unbalanced microbial community composition is asso-
ciated with a dysregulated immune response (Khor et al., 2011).
The microbiome thus likely plays a role in the pathogenesis of
382
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
IBD (Manichanh et al., 2012), but this role remains poorly under-
stood. Previous studies characterized patients with established
disease, but the use of small cohorts resulted in a lack of statis-
tical power to accommodate diverse clinical covariates (Kaa-
koush et al., 2012), and results of these studies were likely
affected by the application of treatments (Morgan et al., 2012).
The existing new-onset studies that examine the fecal micro-
biome (Papa et al., 2012) detected a disease signal; however,
because fecal bacterial ecosystems differ from those in the in-
testinal mucosa (Momozawa et al., 2011), studies of strictly fecal
communities may face limitations in identifying microbes more
directly involved in disease initiation or progression.
To improve our understanding of how the microbiota con-
tributes to the inﬂammatory cascade of Crohn’s disease (CD)
pathogenesis, we performed a study that addresses several
important limitations of previous work. We applied a standard-
ized approach to a large, multicenter cohort of new-onset CD,
collecting samples before treatment initiation, and including
subjects representing the variety of disease phenotypes with
respect to location, severity, and behavior. Here we report on
668 patients that include those with CD and non-IBD controls
(see Table S1A available online), representing the largest single
cohort microbiome study related to new-onset IBD to date as
well as representing the largest characterization of mucosal-
associated microbiota in non-IBD subjects. We used a combina-
tion of next-generation sequencing to deeply characterize the
disease-associated microbiota, and a well-established multi-
variate analysis method to account for a wide range of demo-
graphic and clinical covariates (e.g., age, gender, race, disease
severity, behavior, and location) (Morgan et al., 2012). The
strength of this study lies in the sampling prior to treatment,
the size of the cohort, and the concurrent sampling of different
sites, including multiple mucosal tissue sites, and the luminal
content as stool samples. Finally, we combined two additional
cohorts with the RISK cohort, resulting in a total of 1,742 samples
from pediatric or adult patients, with either new-onset or estab-
lished disease, for which tissue biopsies and/or fecal samples
were processed through a uniform sequencing and analysis
approach. This multicohort study allows us to position the unique
RISK cohort in the context of a comprehensively deﬁned diver-
sity landscape of IBD, and to identify robust and generally appli-
cable biomarkers.
RESULTS
A Unique Treatment-Naive Inception Cohort for
Pediatric CD
We studied the mucosal- and lumen-associated microbiota in a
large, well-characterized inception cohort for CD in children. We
included subjects from 3 to 17 years of age with a well-estab-
lished diagnosis of CD (n = 447), and control subjects (n = 221)
with noninﬂammatory conditions—for example, presenting with
abdominal pain and diarrhea (Table S1A). Mucosal tissue
biopsies (terminal ileum and rectum) and serum samples were
collected as part of the diagnostic colonoscopic examination
prior to the initiation of treatment. A subset of the enrolled
patients (n = 233) also provided a fecal sample prior to treatment
start. The diagnosis and disease categorization was conﬁrmed
after a minimum of 6 months’ follow-up, and was based on a
combination of endoscopic, histological, and radiological in-
vestigations. A total of 1,321 samples, including 630 ileal and
387 rectal tissue biopsies and 304 stool samples, were submit-
ted for microbiome proﬁling using 16S rRNA gene sequencing
on the Illumina MiSeq platform (version 2) with 175 bp paired-
end reads. After quality ﬁltering and assembling overlapping
paired-end reads, more than 45.5 million sequences were re-
tained (mean of 29,915 sequences per sample), providing the
most in-depth characterization of treatment-naive CD-associ-
ated communities to date.
The Key Players of the Microbial Dysbiosis in New-Onset
Pediatric CD
An unweighted UniFrac-based comparison of the mucosal-
associated microbiota from patients with new-onset CD and
controls indicated that the overall diversity in microbial composi-
tion was mainly differentiated by sample type and microbial
diversity, but disease phenotype was not strong enough to
differentiate patients (Figure 1A). Instead, complex microbial
communities from samples with multiple clinical covariates are
best explored by multivariate association tests at the level of
speciﬁc microbial community members. We identiﬁed microbial
organisms that reached statistically signiﬁcant association with
subjects’ disease phenotype using the MaAsLin pipeline, which
identiﬁes signiﬁcant associations of the microbiota with multiple,
potentially confounded sample variables (see Experimental Pro-
cedures). This has the beneﬁt of testing for disease characteris-
tics while controlling for several known or potential confounding
variables, such as past antibiotic use, age, gender, and race.
Correction for other factors that typically have a signiﬁcant
impact on the microbial composition, including treatment and
disease duration, was not necessary, because all samples
were collected prior to treatment and at standard intestinal sites
regardless of the segments involved in the disease.
Biomarker detection analysis of mucosal-associated micro-
biome showed that inﬂammatory conditions were most strongly
associated with an overall drop in species richness and an alter-
ation in the abundance of several taxa (Figure 1B; Table S2,
panel A). Several of these taxa have been reported in previous
studies (Papa et al., 2012; Morgan et al., 2012), including Enter-
obacteriaceae, Bacteroidales, and Clostridiales. However, we
were able to identify additional taxa as signiﬁcant biomarkers
for disease. Most noticeably, we detected positive correlations
between CD and abundances of Pasteurellaceae (Haemophilus
sp.), Veillonellaceae, Neisseriaceae, and Fusobacteriaceae.
Fusobacterium has previously been suggested as a biomarker
for IBD (Strauss et al., 2011) and was also recently shown to
promote a beneﬁcial microenvironment for the progression of
colorectal carcinoma (Kostic et al., 2012), a long-term complica-
tion of IBD. Subsampling the data set to either smaller sample
sizes or lower sequencing depths indicated that sample size
contributes more substantially to the increased statistical power,
highlighting the importance of sampling a large cohort. Lowering
the number of sequences to 300 reads/sample (1% of the data)
did not affect our ability to detect these taxa (data not shown),
but reducing to half of the samples or lower did begin to affect
the recovery of some taxa (Figure S1A). Interestingly, few of
these taxa were present at a higher abundance in patients under
the age of 10, and were thus negatively correlated with age,
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
383
including Pasteurellaceae and Neisseriaceae (Table S2, panel A;
Figure S1B).
An increased level of Bacteroides and Clostridiales was
maintained in non-CD patients relative to those with CD (Table
S2, panel A). Speciﬁc negative associations with CD were de-
tected for several genera, including Bacteroides, Faecalibacte-
rium, Roseburia, Blautia, Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, and a
number of taxa within the families of Ruminococcaceae and
Lachnospiraceae. A well-described anti-inﬂammatory organism
that is considered to be a sensor and marker of health is
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (Sokol et al., 2008). Reduced ileal
abundance of F. prausnitzii has been associated with a higher
rate of endoscopic recurrence of inﬂammation 6 months after
ileo-cecal resection.
New-Onset Mucosal-Associated Dysbiosis Is Only
Weakly Reﬂected in Stool
The imbalance in the microbial community network was only
observed in the microbiome proﬁles obtained from tissue
samples, and was not seen in the stool samples collected at
the time of the diagnosis (Figure 1B). This was conﬁrmed by per-
forming separate biomarker detection on the stool samples of
CD patients and controls with noninﬂammatory conditions, re-
sulting in only a short list of taxa signiﬁcantly associated with dis-
ease. This included a gain in Streptococcus and a loss in a few
taxa belonging to the order of Clostridiales, including Dorea,
Blautia, and Ruminococcus (Table S2, panel B). With a mean
abundance far below 0.1%, all of these taxa were minimally
contributing to the overall shift. Consequently, we further inves-
tigated the precise differences between the mucosal tissue and
stool samples within patients with new-onset CD (Figure S1C;
Table S2, panel C). Of the four above-mentioned taxonomic
groups that were decreased in CD, all except Bacteroidales
were found to be signiﬁcantly increased in stool samples, along
with Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus. In addi-
tion, the levels of Fusobacteriaceae and Neisseriaceae were
reduced, but no signiﬁcant differences were noted for any of
the other organisms typically associated with inﬂammatory
conditions. Based on these observations, we can infer that the
microbial balance is less shifted toward a dysbiotic state in the
lumen despite the disease, explaining the lack of a biomarker
signal and emphasizing the need to examine tissue biopsies in
addition to stool samples in order to gain a better understanding
of possible mechanisms.
Antibiotic Exposure Ampliﬁes the Microbial Dysbiosis
Antibiotic usage has previously been linked to substantial
taxonomic changes in the gastrointestinal microbial com-
position (Dethlefsen et al., 2008; Antonopoulos et al., 2009; Man-
ichanh et al., 2010). Here, a small subset of the CD patients
Figure
1. Most
Differential
Taxa
in
Pediatric CD
(A) A set of principal coordinate plots of the un-
weighted UniFrac distance, with each sample
colored either by the disease phenotype (left),
alpha diversity (middle), or sample type (right).
PC1, PC2, and PC3 represent the top three prin-
cipal coordinates that captured most of the di-
versity, with the fraction of diversity captured by
that coordinate shown in percent.
(B) Differences in abundance are shown for the
taxonomic biomarkers that were detected using a
multivariate statistical approach (see Experimental
Procedures and Table S2). The fold change for
each taxon was calculated by dividing the mean
abundance in the cases by that of the controls.
Several taxonomic biomarkers measured at both
the ileal and the rectal sites were found to be
signiﬁcantly correlated with disease phenotype;
however, most of that microbial signal was lost in
the stool samples. The fraction of patients that
were on antibiotics during sample collection was
considered as an individual subtype, due to the
large confounding impact antibiotic exposure
causes on the microbial composition (see Table
S2). The left shows cases without antibiotic treat-
ment, and the right includes the fraction of cases
(10%) that were under antibiotic pressure at
sampling. The taxa at the top are increased in
disease state, whereas the taxa at the bottom
follow an opposite trend. Apparent missing bars
are cases in which there is no difference, or fold
change equals 1. Use of antibiotics does impact
the microbial composition by tipping the microbial
community further toward a dysbiotic state, and
has a differential impact on the taxa, depending on
organism and sampling site. Related to Figure S1
and Table S1.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
384
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
(n = 57/447, 13%) was on antibiotics during sample collection,
allowing a comparison between the microbiome in CD patients
with and without antibiotic exposure. Although a weak effect
on disease severity (PCDAI) and overall species diversity be-
tween the patient groups with and without antibiotics was found
(p = 0.043 and 0.02, respectively; Student’s t test), we observed
a strong effect on the microbial composition, and exposure to
antibiotics generally ampliﬁed the dysbiosis. A more extreme
impact was seen on the abundance levels of the phyla increased
in noninﬂammatory conditions, including Bacteroides, Clostri-
diales, and Erysipelotrichaceae, which was most pronounced
in rectal biopsy and stool samples, with a differential effect de-
pending on taxa and sample type, e.g., a 10-fold increase in
Fusobacteriaceae in the ileum and Enterobacteriaceae in the
rectum (Figure 1B). The Pasteurellaceae were suppressed in
the ileum, whereas the Veillonellaceae were decreased in the
rectum and stool. We note that excluding samples from subjects
with antibiotics exposure during sampling does not change the
key players of the dysbiotic state outlined above (Table S2, panel
2A0). These results do not provide any causative explanation but
are relevant in the context of previously described associations
between higher antibiotic exposure and the diagnosis of CD
(Hviid et al., 2011). We hypothesize that the use of antibiotics
has the potential to impact the overall community structure
and increase the potential for exposure to dysbiosis.
The Functional Dysbiosis at the Mucosal Tissue Sites
Reﬂects that of Established Disease
Shotgun sequencing for metagenomics would provide the
greatest precision of microbial community assays and direct
evidence of microbial function. However, nucleotide extracts of
mucosal tissue samples consist of extremely high fractions
(>99%) of host-derived nucleotides. In the absence of methods
to efﬁciently dissociate the microbial from the host fraction, no
cost-effective shotgun sequencing of the microbial communities
can be performed. Therefore, we predicted the functional
composition of these mucosal-associated microbiota using
PICRUSt (Morgan et al., 2012) (Table S2, panel D). This algorithm
estimates the functional potential of microbial communities
given a marker gene survey and the set of currently sequenced
reference genomes with an accuracy of 80%–90% on human
gut communities. The functional changes in the samples of
new-onset CD patients included a loss in basic biosynthesis
(related to reductions in Bacteroides and Clostridia) and a
switch toward pathobiont-like auxotrophy (increase in aerobic
or aerotolerant taxa, i.e., Proteobacteria and Pasteurellaceae).
Further, biomethanation was replaced by acetogenesis in order
to reduce accumulated hydrogen. An increased disease severity
further ampliﬁed the disease signal of oxidative stress and
auxotrophy. Interestingly, components of the benzoate meta-
bolic pathway were associated with disease (aminobenzoate
degradation) and disease severity (ﬂuorobenzoate degradation).
Intermediaries of benzoate metabolism are known to inﬂuence
microbial dysbiosis as a stress response (Eloe-Fadrosh and
Rasko, 2013) and have the ability to promote Enterobacteria-
ceae growth and virulence (Freestone et al., 2007). Antibiotic
exposure had several overlapping effects on the functional
composition of the gut microbiota and took up one-third of all
signiﬁcant associations, including a unique series of pathways
related to xenobiotic metabolism (degradation of aminoben-
zoate, styrene, chloroalkene, toluene, benzoate, etc.).
Describing Disease Status with the Microbial Dysbiosis
Index
We inferred a taxon-taxon interaction network for the ileal sam-
ples (see Experimental Procedures) and found relationships
among disease-associated organisms mentioned above (Fig-
ure 2A; Table S2, panel E). Out of all signiﬁcant interactions
found, 52% supported a co-occurrence within the two groups
of taxa that behave similarly with respect to disease (i.e., increase
or decrease in CD, respectively), and 30% supported a strong
co-exclusion between these two groups. Importantly, the taxa
within the families Enterobacteriaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, Pas-
teurellaceae, and Veillonellaceae were often found together, as
well as different taxa within the Clostridia or Clostridia and Bac-
teroidetes teaming up with one another. These observations
led us to calculate the log of [total abundance in organisms
increased in CD] over [total abundance of organisms decreased
in CD] for all samples, hereafter referred to as the Microbial
Dysbiosis index (MD-index). This MD-index, derived on disease
phenotype, showed a strong positive correlation with clinical dis-
ease severity (PCDAI) (Figure 2B) and negative correlation with
species richness (Figure 2C), demonstrating that a severe dis-
ease state manifests a strongly reduced species diversity in favor
of a more extreme dysbiosis. Further, this index was a straightfor-
ward feature capturing the overall beta-diversity, resulting in a
clear gradient by which samples group across all sample types
(Figure 2D). This gradient reﬂects shifts in both groups of organ-
isms, those increased and decreased with disease (Figure S2B).
Lastly, the MD-index was also signiﬁcantly higher in those pa-
tients positive for two or more microbial or cytokine serological
markers (p < 0.0001, Student’s t test). Since serologic markers
are increasingly being used to help differentiate IBD disease
phenotypes, such an association might indicate a potential link
between the gut microbial biomarkers and the presence of these
serologic biomarkers. However, with the data collected for this
cohort, no speciﬁc correlations were found.
CD is characterized by inﬂammation spanning multiple tissue
layers, with deep ulcer formation linked with worse long-term
disease outcomes. The RISK cohort measured deep ulceration
during the diagnostic colonoscopy, presenting us with the op-
portunity to examine a link between the gut microbiota and
mucosal ulceration. The recorded prevalence of any deep ulcers
(ileum or colon) with CD patients amounted to 42% (Table S1A).
In those patients, we observed increased levels of Pasteurella-
caea and Veillonellaceae (p < 0.01, FDR corrected p < 0.15)
and Rothia mucilaginosa (p = 0.0004, FDR corrected p = 0.02).
In addition, an association with the KEGG pathway for patho-
genic Escherichia coli infection was positively associated with
ulcer formation (Table S2, panel D). Further experimental study
will be needed to determine whether any of these organisms
are causally involved in ulceration in IBD patients, or merely
adapted to live in this affected environment.
Shotgun Metagenome-Based Identiﬁcation of Microbial
Biomarkers
Most published studies of the microbiome in IBD so far have
used a 16S rRNA gene-based approach and are thereby limited
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
385
in characterizing the microbiota to a resolution at the family/
genus level. To study the microbiota at a higher resolution, a
subset of 43 stool samples (10 controls and 33 subjects) were
shotgun sequenced for metagenomics using the Illumina
HiSeq2000 platform (mean 13.3 gigabases [Gb] and SD 2.5 Gb
per sample, paired-end reads, fragment insert size 180 bp).
Metagenomic data were ﬁltered for human and low-quality
reads, and further analyzed as described in Experimental Proce-
dures. As indicated above, the stool samples of patients do not
reﬂect the dysbiosis in a similar way as the mucosal tissue sam-
ples, a ﬁnding that we conﬁrmed at both the taxonomic and the
functional levels with these data (data not shown). Nevertheless,
mucosal-associated organisms were not restricted to any
particular intestinal location, and were readily observed in all
sample types, although at lower abundances. Therefore, by
adding metagenomics data on the subset of stool samples, we
were able to proﬁle the composition of microbial communities
at a ﬁner taxonomic resolution (Table S2, panel F). The dominant
species increased in CD were Escherichia coli, Fusobacterium
nucleatum,
Haemophilus
parainﬂuenzae
(Pasteurellaceae),
Veillonella parvula, Eikenella corrodens (Neisseriaceae), and
Gemella moribillum. The dominant species decreased in CD
were Bacteroides vulgatus, Bacteroides caccae, Biﬁdobacte-
rium biﬁdum, Biﬁdobacterium longum, Biﬁdobacterium adoles-
centis, Biﬁdobacterium dentum, Blautia hansenii, Ruminococcus
gnavus, Clostridium nexile, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Rumi-
noccus torques, Clostridium bolteae, Eubacterium rectale,
Roseburia intestinalis, and Coprococcus comes.
This detailed information and availability of genomic data
will be useful in further functional characterization of these
organisms and their roles in disease pathogenesis. In a ﬁrst
exploration, we performed a comparison between representa-
tive reference genomes for each of these species, generating a
view of the differential KEGG pathways (Figure 3). The species
increased in CD uniquely contributed pathway components of
glycerophospholipid and lipopolysaccharide metabolism, found
to instigate inﬂammation (Morita et al., 1999), and phosphonoa-
cetate hydrolase, providing access to a novel carbon and phos-
phate source not accessible to most other organisms (Kim et al.,
2011). Interestingly, the latter is a zinc-dependent enzyme that
might contribute to a mineral deﬁciency common in newly diag-
nosed IBD patients. The pathway components unique to the
Figure 2. The Microbial Dysbiosis Index Characterizes CD Severity
(A) A correlation network was inferred for the ileal microbiota compositions using CCREPE with a checkerboard score, indicating a strong co-occurrence between
taxa of the same disease-associated behavior and a co-exclusion between taxa of a different behavior. Nodes represent the different taxa, and color corresponds
to their behavior in disease, with green for those decreased in CD and red for those increased in CD. Edges between nodes represent correlations between the
nodes they connect, with edge colors of dark and light gray indicating positive and negative correlations, respectively. For clarity, only edges corresponding to
correlations whose similarity was less than 0.3 are shown.
(B) Scatterplot of the arcsine square root transformed abundances of all summed abundances for the taxa increased (top) or decreased (bottom) in CD, versus the
pediatric CD activity index (PCDAI [Hyams et al., 1991]) as a measure for disease severity.
(C) Scatter density plot of the species richness (Chao1 [Chao et al., 2006]) versus the Microbial Dysbiosis index (MD-index) for each sample. The increase in blue
color (white to dark blue) reﬂects the density of the scatterplot. The MD-index is deﬁned as the log of [total abundance in organisms increased in CD] over [total
abundance of organisms decreased in CD] (organisms listed in Figure 1A) and is intended as an overall summary statistic for the microbial dysbiosis described in
more detail in (A). In samples with a high MD-index (>1), a strong reduction in the species richness was observed.
(D) A principal coordinate plot of the unweighted UniFrac distance, colored by the MD-index. Sqrt, square root.
Related to Figure S2 and Table S2.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
386
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
species decreased in CD contribute to the bile acid and amino
acid biosynthesis pathways, including connections between
amino acid metabolism and energy, carbohydrate, or nucleotide
metabolism. Collectively, these provide access to complex
carbohydrates, and the break at the alpha-ketoglutarate step
of the TCA cycle is indicative of a true anaerobic lifestyle, as
indicated previously (Morgan et al., 2012).
Biopsy-Associated Microbiome Can Diagnose CD
Several recent studies have explored the potential for identifying
disease states based on the host-associated microbial com-
position, including skin swabs for psoriasis (Statnikov et al.,
2013), and fecal samples for obesity (Le Chatelier et al., 2013),
autism (Hsiao et al., 2013), or IBD (Papa et al., 2012). Here, we
evaluated how the microbiome composition in three different
sample types performed for classifying subjects by CD state
using a receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. We
included a total of 425 tissue biopsies of the ileum, 300 of the
rectum, and 199 stool samples in three independent analyses
(Figures 4A–4C). Microbiome proﬁles were collapsed to the
genus-level abundances and normalized (see Experimental Pro-
cedures). The best performance was obtained by the ileal sam-
ples (AUC = 0.85), closely followed by the rectal biopsies
(AUC = 0.78), both with a narrow conﬁdence interval. The stool
samples, however, performed less well (AUC = 0.66) and had
also a low consistency (broader conﬁdence interval). A previous
study was able to get a higher performance with stool samples
for disease classiﬁcation in an IBD cohort (Papa et al., 2012),
but their patient cohort distinguishes itself from RISK by the
fact that subjects had a mean disease duration of 34.8 months,
whereas the RISK cohort is entirely new-onset, with samples
only taken at the time of diagnosis. This ﬁnding is consistent
with the biomarker detection analysis that indicated that several
taxonomic groups were increased or decreased between cases
and controls when comparing mucosal-associated microbiome
proﬁles, but not in stool samples (Figure 1). Interestingly, classi-
ﬁcation of subjects by disease state was not affected by disease
location. In this cohort, 22% had disease conﬁned to the ileum
and 25% to the colon, and 53% had ileocolonic disease. Sam-
ples from both tissue biopsy locations could classify subjects,
even if disease was conﬁned to the other location. In fact, micro-
biome composition between the different biopsy sites was found
to be far less different than between tissue and stool, for all three
disease subphenotypes (Figure 4D).
Further, this cohort presented the opportunity to derive a
predictive model for future disease outcome, as patients with a
positive diagnosis for CD were re-examined at a 6- and
12-month follow-up, at which point the disease activity index
(PCDAI) was determined. For all patients with such follow-up
data available (n = 305), 7.5% had an increased disease severity
Figure 3. Comparative Genomics of CD Biomarkers
The KEGG metabolic pathways that differentiate the species by behavior in disease state are shown as a heatmap. A selection of reference genomes that are
representative for the species increased or decreased with disease were obtained from IMG (JGI), and biomarker detection was performed on their gene content
at the level of KEGG pathways. Several were statistically signiﬁcant (Wilcoxon, p < 10e-8) and are visualized here. Related to Table S2.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
387
6 months after diagnosis, and for 22% the severity reduced from
severe (PCDAI > 30) to remission (PCDAI < 10). No tissue
samples were collected at later time points, and thus no
follow-up mucosal microbiome proﬁles exist. However, we could
evaluate a model for predicting whether a patient will develop an
exacerbated or reduced disease severity over the next 6 months,
using the microbiome and clinical covariates collected at the
time of onset of disease. Using a random forests classiﬁer
trained on 90% of the data, we found we were able to predict
high 6-month PCDAI (R10) in the remaining 10% of the data
with 67.0% accuracy, a 14% improvement over the predictive
accuracy of a model trained only on clinical covariates
(52.9% ± 0.4%) (Figure S3A). Although the absolute level of
accuracy is modest, the performance gain driven by the micro-
biome is a direct and unbiased demonstration of the utility of
microbiome features for predicting clinical outcomes. To deter-
mine how inﬂuential a given feature was in building the predictive
model, we tested the decrease in accuracy of the model when
that feature was removed. The most inﬂuential features for
predicting future PCDAI according to this test were age of
onset, PCDAI at diagnosis, and levels of disease-associated
organisms, including Enterobacteriaceae, Fusobacterium, and
Haemophilus. Age of onset and levels of Enterobacteriaceae
were negatively correlated with future PCDAI, and PCDAI at
diagnosis and levels of Fusobacterium and Haemophilus were
positively correlated with future PCDAI (Figure S3B).
Comparing Pediatric CD with Other Adult-Established
Disease Cohorts
To position the above ﬁndings in the context of other IBD
microbiome studies, we resequenced samples from a previously
published study (Morgan et al., 2012) and included samples from
Figure 4. Disease Classiﬁcation Performs Well on Biopsy-Associated Microbiome Proﬁles
(A–C) For each of the three sample types, including terminal ileum biopsy (A), rectum biopsy (B), and stool sample (C), we evaluated the accuracy of disease
classiﬁcation using L1 penalized logistic regression with ROC curves representing the results. Dashed lines show the mean performance obtained when genus-
level features were used, and the surrounding gray area is the 95% conﬁdence interval. Terminal ileum biopsies performed best (AUC = 0.85), closely matched by
the rectum biopsies (AUC = 0.78). However, the classiﬁer based on the stool samples collected at the time of the diagnosis performs less well (AUC = 0.66), and
with low consistency (large conﬁdence interval).
(D) The intrasubject diversity in microbiome composition was determined for all pairwise sample type combinations. Both biopsy samples were found to be highly
similar, whereas the stool sample was quite diverse. Further, we also compared whether disease location would impact the intrasubject diversity between the
two tissue biopsy locations. The location of the disease, ileal (L1), colonic (L2), or ileocolonic (L3), did not signiﬁcantly disrupt the similarity between the two in-
trasubject mucosal-associated microbiota. Also, no biomarker was detected that would allow us to distinguish these disease subphenotypes. Related to Figure S3.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
388
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
several other cohorts, using the same sequencing approach.
Combining all of these samples resulted in data from more
than 1,500 subjects, of whom 46% had CD, 31% had ulcerative
colitis (UC), and 19% were non-IBD controls, and included both
tissue biopsies (88%) and stool samples (12%) (Table S1B). Two
important differences between the RISK cohort participants and
the other cohorts were (1) the lower age range (13 years, SD 3,
versus 41 years, SD 15) and (2) the fact that RISK exclusively
enrolled patients with new-onset disease, whereas the mean
disease duration at time of sampling in the other cohorts was 7
years since diagnosis (SD 11, range 0–62). The combined data
set consisted of nearly 60 million paired-end 16S reads, with a
mean of 23,620 ﬁltered sequences per sample.
To our knowledge, this is the largest uniformly generated
microbiome data set for CD speciﬁcally, but also IBD in general,
revealing an extensive landscape of microbial diversity across a
wide range of subjects and disease phenotypes. We therefore
took the opportunity to examine the effect size of disease pheno-
type on the microbiome composition relative to the effects intro-
duced by cohort, age, gender, treatment, and biopsy location.
We surveyed effects on the biodiversity as a whole, and on the
organisms contributing to the dysbiosis speciﬁcally, and used
a linear mixed-effects model including cohort and subject as
random factors (see Experimental Procedures). The results
revealed that interindividual variation, cohort, and sample type
had signiﬁcant effects on the overall microbial community
composition, and that variation introduced by disease pheno-
Figure 5. A View of the Microbial Composi-
tion across Different IBD Cohorts
We combined microbial proﬁles obtained for 1,742
subjects from three different IBD cohorts and
generated a set of principal coordinate plots of the
unweighted UniFrac distance, where each sample
was colored by (A) cohort, (B) disease type, (C)
MD-index, or (D) species richness (Chao1). From
this combined view, it is clear that the ﬁrst principal
coordinate (PC1) stratiﬁes the samples by species
richness, which is negatively correlated with
MD-index, and that the second principal coordi-
nate (PC2) is largely affected by cohort. Disease
phenotype is no obvious driver for sample clus-
tering.
type and treatment was hidden under-
neath those primary factors (Table S2,
panel G). However, within speciﬁc sample
types (e.g., terminal ileum), disease can
explain up to 10% of the variation seen
in subsets of key dysbiotic taxa, in which
the effects of having CD versus control do
surface. The earlier described impact of
antibiotics on the microbial community
network was one of the stronger signals
across all cohorts, and found in almost
all included sample types. Interestingly,
the signal was stronger in the mucosal-
associated
microbiome
proﬁles
than
in the stool samples (Figure S2A). In
contrast, the impact of antibiotics on
overall microbial diversity was stronger in stool than in mucosal
samples, again indicating that conclusions may differ based on
which sample types are studied. Taken together, this advocates
for a need to standardize sample collection, include diverse sam-
ple types to represent different gastrointestinal compartments,
and account for treatment effect in order to get the most statisti-
cal power to study the role of the microbiome in diseases.
Lastly, we aimed to determine the effect on individual taxa
using a biomarker detection approach and compare the results
across the different cohorts and disease phenotypes. Most of
the organisms that were found to be increased in CD were also
found to be signiﬁcantly correlated with UC, but those taxa
that were negatively associated with CD were not found to be
signiﬁcant in association with UC (Table S2, panel H). When
using a weighted UniFrac distance calculation and a PCoA visu-
alization (Figure 5), the clustering by overall microbial community
composition was strongly affected by cohort (Figure 5B), and
different disease subgroups signiﬁcantly overlapped (Figure 5A).
However, the MD-index (Figure 5C) and species richness (Fig-
ure 5D) still explained the ﬁrst principal coordinate even when
the different cohorts were combined and demonstrate that the
speciﬁc disease-associated taxa were consistent.
DISCUSSION
Our results on the microbiome at the onset of CD have identiﬁed
the key constituents of the complex gut microbial community
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
389
that deﬁne a mucosal surface in homeostasis or dysbiosis. Our
work demonstrates that the creation of such a large multicenter
cohort increases the resolution and statistical power for studying
the role of the microbiome in disease. Several of the taxa we
identiﬁed were only reliably associated with disease phenotype
when using several hundreds of samples. Achieving similar
sample sizes by combining independent cohorts for a cross-
study comparison limits the study of parameters with large effect
size that surpass the bias introduced by differences in collection
and sample handling (Lozupone et al., 2013). Capturing micro-
bial shifts in their full complexity, including taxa with smaller
shifts in relative abundance comparing cases versus controls,
require these large, optimal study designs.
Several of the organisms identiﬁed in this study are known to
reside at the inﬂamed mucosa with the potential to exacerbate
inﬂammation and/or invade intestinal epithelial cells, including
strains of Escherichia (Rolhion and Darfeuille-Michaud, 2007)
and Fusobacterium (Strauss et al., 2011). Others, such as
Haemophilus and Veillonella, have recently been reported to
contribute to oral dysbiosis in IBD patients (Said et al., 2013).
Haemophilus spp., like the Enterobacteriaceae, are well adapted
to survive in oxidative stress environments and intensify oxida-
tive stress in airway infections (Harrison et al., 2012). Interest-
ingly, Veillonella spp. are closely related to the Clostridiales,
who are otherwise considered to be beneﬁcial to the host (Furu-
sawa et al., 2013). Prior literature, however, indicates that Veillo-
nella produce lipopolysaccharides (Gupta, 2011), a gene cluster
they might have gained through horizontal gene transfer
(M. Fischbach, personal communication). Rothia mucilaginosa,
here reported at increased levels in patients with intestinal ulcer
formation, has been found to act as an opportunistic pathogen in
immunocompromised patients (Chavan et al., 2013) and has a
genomic content that is well adapted to live within the microaer-
ophilic surface of the mucus layer in cystic ﬁbrosis lungs (Lim
et al., 2013). Most of these organisms are relatively rare in the
colon, and typically part of the normal human oral and upper
respiratory tract microbiota, but could become opportunistic
colonizers in conditions of altered mucosal changes in tissue
oxygenation and disruption of mucosal barrier function.
We observed that both the ileal and the rectal biopsy have
similar discriminatory power for classifying disease, regardless
of the disease location. This creates the opportunity to use a
minimally invasive sampling approach that avoids bowel prepa-
ration prior to the colonoscopy, and to perform dense sampling
of the mucosal-associated microbiome to monitor the response
to treatment and potentially predict changes in disease ﬂares.
Being able to account more readily for the microbiota in larger
cohort sizes will be of value in deﬁning disease subphenotypes
and tracking treatment effects in clinical trials, something that
is currently not annotated. Understanding the microbial commu-
nities of the small intestine remains of tremendous value.
Mucosal-associated microbes are uniquely positioned to inﬂu-
ence the immune system (Belkaid and Naik, 2013); particularly,
the porous mucus layer in the ileum has been shown to educate
the immune system to develop tolerance toward commensals
(Shan et al., 2013).
Large-scale collection of stool samples would be an even less
invasive approach but for this cohort did not reﬂect the mucosal
dysbiosis, in contrast to an earlier study (Papa et al., 2012). The
main difference between the two cohorts is that new-onset
patients were sampled at the time of diagnosis. The earlier study
included samples of patients with established disease (mean of 3
years at time of sampling) and a treatment history. We observed
that the microbial community associated with the inﬂamed
epithelium had an increased level of aerobic and facultative
anaerobes (e.g., Protebacteria), whereas obligate anaerobes
prevailed in the feces (e.g., Bacteroides and Clostridiales). The
microbial community in stool from patients with established
disease also consists of less anaerobes (Papa et al., 2012).
This is consistent with a recent observation that the oxygen level
in the lumen increases with intestinal inﬂammation to such a
level that gut microbiota start to shift toward an aerotolerant
composition in response to an oxidative stress (Mimouna et al.,
2011). In order to validate this observation, future work will
need to consistently capture samples from patients across a
wide range of disease durations.
Another factor affecting the gut microbial composition is the
use of antibiotics, as shown in a subset of the RISK cohort
patients. Previously, antibiotics have been claimed to provide
beneﬁts for CD patients as a ﬁrst-line therapy. However, we
question this practice based on our observation that the micro-
bial network appears more dysbiotic in the context of antibiotic
exposure. Loss of protective microbes has the potential of
triggering a proliferation of less beneﬁcial taxa (Looft and Allen,
2012), exacerbating the inﬂammation. Similarly, changing die-
tary patterns can introduce such shifts as quickly (Wu et al.,
2011), particularly in those individuals with reduced microbial
complexity (Fang and Evans, 2013). For example, the vitamin D
pathway has importance in gut homeostasis and in signaling
between the microbiota and the host immune system, and may
thus have implications for the development, severity, and man-
agement of inﬂammation (Mouli and Ananthakrishnan, 2014).
The data presented here provide a unique framework for
understanding the microbial dysbiosis in new-onset CD. This
will further develop principles that are likely to govern therapeu-
tics in IBD, but they will need to be carefully thought through
(Fischbach et al., 2013). These include in particular those efforts
that aim to shift the microbiome following a path that is based on
the successful principles applied to recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile
infections, as these are unlikely to be directly applicable to the
multifactorial disease pathogenesis of IBD.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Study Population and Sample Collection
A total of 447 children and adolescents (<17 years) with newly diagnosed CD
and a control population composed of 221 subjects with noninﬂammatory
conditions of the gastrointestinal tract were enrolled to the RISK study in 28
participating pediatric gastroenterology centers in North America between
November 2008 and January 2012 (Table S1A). Biopsies were taken from
the terminal ileum and rectum using standard endoscopic forceps and placed
into a sterile cryovial with RNAlater (QIAGEN) on ice in the Endoscopy Suite.
Nucleotides were isolated from these biopsies using the QIAGEN AllPrep
Mini Kit.
16S rRNA Gene Sequencing
The 16S gene data set consists of sequences targeting the V4 variable region.
Sequencing was performed on the Illumina MiSeq platform according to
the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations, with addition of 5% PhiX, and generating
paired-end reads of 175 bp in length in each direction. The overlapping
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
390
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
paired-end reads were stitched together (approximately 97 bp overlap) and
further processed in a data curation pipeline implemented in QIIME 1.7.0 as
pick_closed_reference_otus.py.
Shotgun Metagenomic Sequencing
Metagenomic data production and processing were performed as described
previously (HMP Consortium, 2012). In brief, library construction was per-
formed on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform, targeting 7 Gb of sequence per
sample with 101 bp, paired-end reads. Species abundances were calculated
with MetaPhlAn 1.7.7, following Bowtie 2-2.1.0 alignment to the MetaPhlAn 1.0
unique marker database.
Statistical Analysis
Association testing of all covariates versus all taxa was performed by re-
gressing the relative abundance of each taxon on these linear clinical co-
variates: subject, diagnosis, ulcering, ileal involvement, PCDAI, biopsy
location, age, gender, race, and antibiotic exposure, with subject as a random
variable, using the MaAsLin algorithm with default parameters (Morgan et al.,
2012).
Correlation Network
We extracted the subnetworks of microbial interactions at the terminal ileum
from subjects free of any antibiotics pressure, using CCREPE (Compositional-
ity Corrected by REnormalization and PErmutation). This is a statistical meth-
odology for covariation analysis in compositional data developed on top of
previously published work, using the NC score, a similarity measure specif-
ically designed to detect association patterns in the human microbiome and
other microbial communities (see Supplemental Information).
ROC Analysis
ROC curves were constructed to evaluate the performance of sparse logistic
regression classiﬁer (using L1 penalization) aiming to identify the IBD status of
a subject based on his or her microbiome proﬁle. We have checked the perfor-
mance for classiﬁer trained by samples from three different sites (ileum,
rectum, and stool). Five ROC curves were gained per site using 5-fold cross-
validation. A mean ROC curve was then given by averaging over all ﬁve individ-
ual fold ROC curves, and an approximated 95% pointwise conﬁdence interval
was also constructed by using normal approximation and the sample means
and variances.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
All 16S rRNA sequences have been deposited at the National Center
for Biotechnology Information as two BioProjects under ID numbers
PRJNA237362 and PRJNA205152, and are also available in a variety of tables
through http://www.microbio.me/qiime/ under Study ID 2516.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
three ﬁgures, and two tables and can be found with this article at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2014.02.005.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the patients who donated samples for this study, the health profes-
sionals who collected them, and the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America
for supporting the RISK cohort. We thank Douglas Wendel, Gail Ackermann,
Tim Vigers, and Tim L. Tickle for their valuable input and helpful discussions.
We thank participating clinicians Marla Dubinsky, Joshua Noe, Scott Snapper,
Richard Kellermayer, Michael Kappleman, Anthony Otley, Mirian Pfefferkorn,
Stanley Cohen, Stephen Guthery, Neal LeLeiko, Maria Oliva-Hemker, David
Keljo, Dedrick Moulton, Barbara Kircshner, Ashish Patel, David Ziring, Jona-
than Evans, Jonah Essers, Bruce Aronow, and MiOk Kim. Work was supported
by grants from the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America, The Leona M.
and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, ARO grant W911NF-11-1-0473
(C.H.), and by NIH grants U54 DE023798, R01 HG005969 (C.H.), and R01
DK092405 (R.J.X., C.H., and D.G.).
Received: December 13, 2013
Revised: January 31, 2014
Accepted: February 12, 2014
Published: March 12, 2014
REFERENCES
Antonopoulos, D.A., Huse, S.M., Morrison, H.G., Schmidt, T.M., Sogin, M.L.,
and Young, V.B. (2009). Reproducible community dynamics of the gastrointes-
tinal microbiota following antibiotic perturbation. Infect. Immun. 77, 2367–
2375.
Belkaid, Y., and Naik, S. (2013). Compartmentalized and systemic control of
tissue immunity by commensals. Nat. Immunol. 14, 646–653.
Chao, A., Chazdon, R.L., Colwell, R.K., and Shen, T.J. (2006). Abundance-
based similarity indices and their estimation when there are unseen species
in samples. Biometrics 62, 361–371.
Chavan, R.S., Pannaraj, P.S., Luna, R.A., Szabo, S., Adesina, A., Versalovic, J.,
Krance, R.A., and Kennedy-Nasser, A.A. (2013). Signiﬁcant morbidity and
mortality attributable to rothia mucilaginosa infections in children with hemato-
logical malignancies or following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Pediatr. Hematol. Oncol. 30, 445–454.
Dethlefsen, L., Huse, S., Sogin, M.L., and Relman, D.A. (2008). The pervasive
effects of an antibiotic on the human gut microbiota, as revealed by deep 16S
rRNA sequencing. PLoS Biol. 6, e280.
Eloe-Fadrosh, E.A., and Rasko, D.A. (2013). The human microbiome: from
symbiosis to pathogenesis. Annu. Rev. Med. 64, 145–163.
Fang, S., and Evans, R.M. (2013). Microbiology: wealth management in the
gut. Nature 500, 538–539.
Fischbach, M.A., Bluestone, J.A., and Lim, W.A. (2013). Cell-based therapeu-
tics: the next pillar of medicine. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 179ps177.
Freestone, P.P., Walton, N.J., Haigh, R.D., and Lyte, M. (2007). Inﬂuence of
dietary catechols on the growth of enteropathogenic bacteria. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 119, 159–169.
Furusawa, Y., Obata, Y., Fukuda, S., Endo, T.A., Nakato, G., Takahashi, D.,
Nakanishi, Y., Uetake, C., Kato, K., Kato, T., et al. (2013). Commensal
microbe-derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regulatory
T cells. Nature 504, 446–450.
Gupta, R.S. (2011). Origin of diderm (Gram-negative) bacteria: antibiotic selec-
tion pressure rather than endosymbiosis likely led to the evolution of bacterial
cells with two membranes. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 100, 171–182.
Harrison, A., Bakaletz, L.O., and Munson, R.S., Jr. (2012). Haemophilus inﬂu-
enzae and oxidative stress. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2, 40.
Hsiao, E.Y., McBride, S.W., Hsien, S., Sharon, G., Hyde, E.R., McCue, T.,
Codelli, J.A., Chow, J., Reisman, S.E., Petrosino, J.F., et al. (2013).
Microbiota modulate behavioral and physiological abnormalities associated
with neurodevelopmental disorders. Cell 155, 1451–1463.
Human Microbiome Project Consortium (2012). A framework for human micro-
biome research. Nature 486, 215–221.
Hviid, A., Svanstro¨ m, H., and Frisch, M. (2011). Antibiotic use and inﬂammatory
bowel diseases in childhood. Gut 60, 49–54.
Hyams, J.S., Ferry, G.D., Mandel, F.S., Gryboski, J.D., Kibort, P.M., Kirschner,
B.S., Grifﬁths, A.M., Katz, A.J., Grand, R.J., Boyle, J.T., et al. (1991).
Development and validation of a pediatric Crohn’s disease activity index.
J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 12, 439–447.
Jostins, L., Ripke, S., Weersma, R.K., Duerr, R.H., McGovern, D.P., Hui, K.Y.,
Lee, J.C., Schumm, L.P., Sharma, Y., Anderson, C.A., et al.; International IBD
Genetics Consortium (IIBDGC) (2012). Host-microbe interactions have shaped
the genetic architecture of inﬂammatory bowel disease. Nature 491, 119–124.
Kaakoush, N.O., Day, A.S., Huinao, K.D., Leach, S.T., Lemberg, D.A., Dowd,
S.E., and Mitchell, H.M. (2012). Microbial dysbiosis in pediatric patients with
Crohn’s disease. J. Clin. Microbiol. 50, 3258–3266.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
391
Khor, B., Gardet, A., and Xavier, R.J. (2011). Genetics and pathogenesis of
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Nature 474, 307–317.
Kim, A., Benning, M.M., OkLee, S., Quinn, J., Martin, B.M., Holden, H.M., and
Dunaway-Mariano, D. (2011). Divergence of chemical function in the alkaline
phosphatase superfamily: structure and mechanism of the P-C bond cleaving
enzyme phosphonoacetate hydrolase. Biochemistry 50, 3481–3494.
Kostic, A.D., Gevers, D., Pedamallu, C.S., Michaud, M., Duke, F., Earl, A.M.,
Ojesina, A.I., Jung, J., Bass, A.J., Tabernero, J., et al. (2012). Genomic analysis
identiﬁes association of Fusobacterium with colorectal carcinoma. Genome
Res. 22, 292–298.
Le Chatelier, E., Nielsen, T., Qin, J., Prifti, E., Hildebrand, F., Falony, G.,
Almeida, M., Arumugam, M., Batto, J.M., Kennedy, S., et al.; MetaHIT
Consortium (2013). Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with meta-
bolic markers. Nature 500, 541–546.
Lim, Y.W., Schmieder, R., Haynes, M., Furlan, M., Matthews, T.D., Whiteson,
K., Poole, S.J., Hayes, C.S., Low, D.A., Maughan, H., et al. (2013). Mechanistic
model of Rothia mucilaginosa adaptation toward persistence in the CF lung,
based on a genome reconstructed from metagenomic data. PLoS ONE 8,
e64285.
Looft, T., and Allen, H.K. (2012). Collateral effects of antibiotics on mammalian
gut microbiomes. Gut Microbes 3, 463–467.
Lozupone, C.A., Stombaugh, J., Gonzalez, A., Ackermann, G., Wendel, D.,
Va´ zquez-Baeza, Y., Jansson, J.K., Gordon, J.I., and Knight, R. (2013). Meta-
analyses of studies of the human microbiota. Genome Res. 23, 1704–1714.
Manichanh, C., Reeder, J., Gibert, P., Varela, E., Llopis, M., Antolin, M., Guigo,
R., Knight, R., and Guarner, F. (2010). Reshaping the gut microbiome with
bacterial transplantation and antibiotic intake. Genome Res. 20, 1411–1419.
Manichanh, C., Borruel, N., Casellas, F., and Guarner, F. (2012). The gut micro-
biota in IBD. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 599–608.
Mimouna, S., Gonc¸ alve` s, D., Barnich, N., Darfeuille-Michaud, A., Hofman, P.,
and Vouret-Craviari, V. (2011). Crohn disease-associated Escherichia coli
promote gastrointestinal inﬂammatory disorders by activation of HIF-depen-
dent responses. Gut Microbes 2, 335–346.
Momozawa, Y., Deffontaine, V., Louis, E., and Medrano, J.F. (2011).
Characterization of bacteria in biopsies of colon and stools by high throughput
sequencing of the V2 region of bacterial 16S rRNA gene in human. PLoS ONE
6, e16952.
Morgan, X.C., Tickle, T.L., Sokol, H., Gevers, D., Devaney, K.L., Ward, D.V.,
Reyes,
J.A.,
Shah,
S.A.,
LeLeiko,
N.,
Snapper,
S.B.,
et
al.
(2012).
Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in inﬂammatory bowel disease and
treatment. Genome Biol. 13, R79.
Morita, H., Nakanishi, K., Dohi, T., Yasugi, E., and Oshima, M. (1999).
Phospholipid turnover in the inﬂamed intestinal mucosa: arachidonic acid-
rich phosphatidyl/plasmenyl-ethanolamine in the mucosa in inﬂammatory
bowel disease. J. Gastroenterol. 34, 46–53.
Mouli, V.P., and Ananthakrishnan, A.N. (2014). Review article: vitamin D and
inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 39, 125–136.
Papa, E., Docktor, M., Smillie, C., Weber, S., Preheim, S.P., Gevers, D.,
Giannoukos, G., Ciulla, D., Tabbaa, D., Ingram, J., et al. (2012). Non-invasive
mapping of the gastrointestinal microbiota identiﬁes children with inﬂamma-
tory bowel disease. PLoS ONE 7, e39242.
Rolhion, N., and Darfeuille-Michaud, A. (2007). Adherent-invasive Escherichia
coli in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 13, 1277–1283.
Said, H.S., Suda, W., Nakagome, S., Chinen, H., Oshima, K., Kim, S., Kimura,
R., Iraha, A., Ishida, H., Fujita, J., et al. (2013). Dysbiosis of salivary microbiota
in inﬂammatory bowel disease and its association with oral immunological
biomarkers. DNA Res. 21, 15–25.
Shan, M., Gentile, M., Yeiser, J.R., Walland, A.C., Bornstein, V.U., Chen, K.,
He, B., Cassis, L., Bigas, A., Cols, M., et al. (2013). Mucus enhances gut
homeostasis and oral tolerance by delivering immunoregulatory signals.
Science 342, 447–453.
Sokol, H., Pigneur, B., Watterlot, L., Lakhdari, O., Bermu´ dez-Humara´ n, L.G.,
Gratadoux, J.J., Blugeon, S., Bridonneau, C., Furet, J.P., Corthier, G., et al.
(2008). Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inﬂammatory commensal bacte-
rium identiﬁed by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16731–16736.
Statnikov, A., Alekseyenko, A.V., Li, Z., Henaff, M., Perez-Perez, G.I., Blaser,
M.J., and Aliferis, C.F. (2013). Microbiomic signatures of psoriasis: feasibility
and methodology comparison. Sci. Rep. 3, 2620.
Strauss, J., Kaplan, G.G., Beck, P.L., Rioux, K., Panaccione, R., Devinney, R.,
Lynch, T., and Allen-Vercoe, E. (2011). Invasive potential of gut mucosa-
derived Fusobacterium nucleatum positively correlates with IBD status of
the host. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 17, 1971–1978.
Wu, G.D., Chen, J., Hoffmann, C., Bittinger, K., Chen, Y.Y., Keilbaugh, S.A.,
Bewtra, M., Knights, D., Walters, W.A., Knight, R., et al. (2011). Linking long-
term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science 334, 105–108.
Cell Host & Microbe
The New-Onset Microbiome in Crohn’s Disease
392
Cell Host & Microbe 15, 382–392, March 12, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
