Bilal Hameed, Uma Mahadevan, and Kay Washington, Section Editors
Dyspepsia and Increased Levels of Liver Enzymes in a
24-Year-Old Man
Shria Kumar and Stacey Prenner
Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Question: A 24-year-old
white man with depres-
sion and anxiety disorder
is referred for an isolated
alanine
aminotransferase
elevation
found
by
his
primary medical doctor on
routine blood work. He
denies a family history of
liver disease, although he
does report a family his-
tory of lupus. He denies
risk factors for viral hepa-
titis. He drinks about 3
alcoholic
beverages
per
week. His family is origi-
nally from Germany and Ireland. He denies over-the-counter medications or supplements beyond a rare use of ibuprofen.
His only medication is daily escitalopram. On further questioning he also reports abdominal pain. The abdominal pain is
described as dull, constant, right upper quadrant pain near his rib cage. The pain occasionally becomes worse if he eats fast
foods. He also notes a 3-month history of bloating and alternating bowel habits between diarrhea and constipation.
Physical examination is notable for unremarkable vital signs and a normal body mass index. He has no stigmata of
chronic liver disease or hepatomegaly. He has normal bowel sounds without any tenderness to palpation. An in-ofﬁce
FibroScan is normal with a value of 3 kPa. Aspartate aminotransferase is 33 U/L (normal, 10–40 U/L). Viral serologies
are notable for nonreactive hepatitis B surface antigen, surface antibody, and core antibody. Hepatitis C virus RNA is un-
detectable. Ferritin, iron, and creatine kinase are normal. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, antimitochondrial antibody, and
antinuclear antibody are negative. Ceruloplasmin is normal and alpha-1 antitrypsin showed MZ phenotype. An abdominal
ultrasound scan shows a normal size liver, normal echotexture, and sludge in the gallbladder, without any intrahepatic or
extrahepatic bile duct dilation. The extrahepatic bile duct diameter is 0.3 cm.
Anti-smooth muscle and quantitative immunoglobulins were ordered. An endoscopy is performed for abdominal pain,
and duodenal endoscopic and histologic images are provided (Figure A and B).
What is the diagnosis?
Look on page 28 for the answer and see the Gastroenterology website (www.gastrojournal.org) for more
information on submitting your favorite image to Clinical Challenges and images in GI.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors disclose no conﬂicts.
© 2019 by the AGA Institute
0016-5085/$36.00
https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2019.04.001
CLINICAL CHALLENGES AND IMAGES IN GI
Gastroenterology 2019;157:27–28
Answer to: Image 3 (Page 27): Celiac Hepatitis
Endoscopic biopsy of this severely scalloped duodenal mucosa demonstrated characteristic ﬁndings of gluten-sensitive
enteropathy, or celiac disease. Celiac disease involvement of the liver is a common extraintestinal manifestation of this
immune-mediated disorder, termed celiac hepatitis. Celiac hepatitis affects 40% of adults with celiac disease.1 The path-
ogenesis is poorly understood, but posited to be related to autoimmunity or toxin-mediated liver injury in the setting of
gluten exposure, gut permeability, chronic inﬂammation, and host susceptibility, among other mechanisms.1–3
Clinical manifestations of celiac hepatitis range from unexplained enzyme elevations in the absence of known liver
disease to autoimmune hepatitis to hepatic steatosis, and even cirrhosis.1 The initial presentation can also be elevated liver
enzymes in the setting of known celiac disease, without known hepatic disease. Histology of the liver is similarly variable,
from a mild or a chronic hepatitis to steatohepatitis and even ﬁbrosis.2 Elevated transaminases less than ﬁve times the
upper limit of normal when found at celiac diagnosis suggest celiac hepatitis, and do not require further workup.1 For these
individuals, response to a gluten-free diet should be monitored and liver chemistries should be repeated at 6–12 months.
Persistently elevated aminotransferases should prompt further workup.1 Generally, enzyme elevation and even the his-
tologic appearance of the liver improve after implementation of a gluten-free diet, although not all.2 In celiac hepatitis
associated with autoimmune liver disease, immunosuppression may be required in addition to abstaining from gluten.3 Our
patient was found to have a TTG level of >100 U/mL (normal, <4 U/mL). He began a gluten-free diet guided by a
nutritionist 4 weeks ago, with rapid improvement in abdominal symptoms, and will be followed to ensure normalization of
liver enzymes, which can take up to 1 year.
References
1.
Rubio-Tapia A, Murray JA. Liver involvement in celiac disease. Minerva Med 2008;99:595–604.
2.
Majumdar K, Sakhuja P, Puri AS, et al. Coeliac disease and the liver: spectrum of liver histology, serology and treatment
response at a tertiary referral centre. J Clin Pathol 2018;71:412–419.
3.
Marciano F, Savoia M, Vajro P. Celiac disease-related hepatic injury: insights into associated conditions and underlying
pathomechanisms. Dig Liver Dis 2016;48:112–119.
For submission instructions, please see the Gastroenterology website (www.gastrojournal.org).
28
CLINICAL CHALLENGES AND IMAGES IN GI
