Breaking
The   VICIOUS
C y c l e Through
          Intestinal Health
                                   Diet

                                           BY
                 Elaine Gottschall
                                   B.A., M.Sc.




           The Kirkton Press
      Baltimore, Ontario, Canada
Copyright 8 2004 Elaine Gotfschall
All rights reserved.

Published by    K i o n Ress Ltd.
                396 Grills Road
                RR #2
                Baltimore Ontario
                KOK lCU

Printed and bound in Canada

Orders for additional copies of this book may be sent to The Kirkton Press (an order form is
available on the last page of this book)

Eleventh Printing-April, 2004



Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data
Gottschall, Elaine Gloria, 1921-
  Breaking the vicious cycle: intestinal health through diet

Rev. ed. of: Food and the gut reaction: intestinal health through diet.
Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-%92768- 1-8

I . Intestines-Diseases-Diet therapy.
2. Inflammatory bowel diseases-Diet therapy.
I. Title. 11. Title: Food and the gut reaction: intestinal health through diet.



No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval
system now known or to be invented, without permission in writing from the publisher, except
by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with a review written for
inclusion in a magazine, newspaper, or broadcast.


Design & Cover Illustration-Marilyn Jones




 OTABIND                 W n d las-bnd) Thnr bOO* has been barnd


                         t~mgerbown me spms and ~ h s
                                                    pages WII I I ~
                                                                 nat

Bound t o stay o p e n
                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

        In the research, writing, and publishing of this book I
received moral, intellectual, and emotional support from
many people. Among these, the following people stand out
and to them goes my deepest appreciation:
        Dr. Donald B. McMillan for his time, expertise, sup-
port, and friendship.
        Catheryne Dahlke for her ability to establish order
and coherence to the present reorganization of this book.
With "one foot" in biological sciences and the other in the
world of publishing, she has accomplished the task of mak-
ing me proud of the 2004 edition of Breaking the Vicious
Cycle, featuring the new chapter on autism.
        Patricia Wilson for her friendship and willingness to
share her artistic talents by producing the illustrations.
        Diane Jewkes for her patience and expertise in editing
the manuscript.
        Sue Brown, Callie Cesarini, Marge Moulton, Debbie
Newsted, and Jane Sexsmith for their good humor and assis-
tance in helping me execute the numerous revisions.
        Valerie Tabone and Sandra Rule of the Department of
Graphic Services (University of Western Ontario) for their
cooperation and expertise in typesetting and artistic layout
of the manuscript.
        My husband, Herbert, for his unlimited patience,
moral support, and continual prodding to "write the book."
My daughter, Judith Lynn Herod, and her friend, Tad Crohn,
for their superb job of initial editing.
        My daughter, Joan Beth Gottschall, for her continual
encouragement.
         IMPORTANT NOTICE TO THE READER:

        This book contains a diet and nutritional information
that, in the author's experience, has helped those who have
followed it.
        The author recognizes that the treatment of illness
and the enhancement of health through diet should be
supervised by a duly qualified physician. Readers should
not engage in self diagnosis and self treatment. Consult your
doctor before starting the regimen proposed here. This book
will be particularly complemented by discussions with a
physician who has a particular interest or training in
nutrition.
        The author and publisher do not assume medical or
legal liability for the use or misuse of the information and
regimen contained in this book.
       The progress of science implies not only the accumu-
lation of knowledge, but its organization, its unification,
and this involves the periodic invention of new syntheses,
coordinating existing knowledge, and of new hypotheses
which give us methods of approaching the unknown.
                        George Sarton
            Introduction to the History ofscience
                  DEDICATION

       This book is dedicated to the memory of
              Dr. Sidney Valentine Haas
who first showed me the importance of understanding
            the effect of food on the body.
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS


Foreword by Ronald L . Hoffman. M.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I-IV
                                                                                ..
CHAPTER 1 Past and Present          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
CHAPTER 2        Scientific Evidence Relating to Diet . . . . . . .5
CHAPTER 3 Intestinal Microbes: The Unseen World . . .11
CHAPTER 4 Breaking the Vicious Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
CHAPTER 5 Carbohydrate Digestion           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
CHAPTER 6 The Celiac Story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31
CHAPTER 7 The Brain Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
CHAPTER 8 The Autism Conrlection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51
CHAPTER 8 Introducing the Diet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61
CHAPTER 9 The Specific Carbohydrate Diet . . . . . . . . . .73
GOURMET SECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .83
Addendum:        The Mom and Dad Brigade . . . . . . . . . . . .163
For Those on the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .175
Glossary            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .177
Appendix            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .180
References          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .189
Index               . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .203
                         FOREWORD


        Upon discovering Food and the Gut Reaction, the first
edition of Breaking the Vicious Cycle: Intestinal Health
Through Diet, I realized that it contained a useful solution
for the dietary treatment of many gastrointestinal disorders.
By introducing the approach of the "Specific Carbohydrate
Diet", it enables patients to thrive on a varied diet that very
often reduces symptoms and allows healing of an inflamed
intestinal tract. Simply presented, yet sophisticated in its
conception, the "Specific Carbohydrate Diet" transcends sev-
eral oversimplifications to which patients with gastrointesti-
nal problems and their physicians often fall prey.
        Several years ago my book, Seven Weeks to a Settled
Stomach (Simon and Schuster), was published. Since that
time, I have earned a reputation as a trouble-shooter for gas-
trointestinal problems. Patients from many- parts of the
country have consulted me. Many complain of symptoms
consistent with irritable bowel syndrome. Others have been
diagnosed formally with classic inflammatory bowel disease.
And though some patients have responded well to the usual
arsenal of natural digestive aids, intestinal flora replace-
ment, elimination diets, conventional antifungal drugs and
antibiotics, still others found no relief.
        Food and the Gut Reaction, the first edition of this
book, was introduced to me by a colleague and friend, Dr.
Leo Galland. He mentioned the book after one of his patients
brought the book to his attention. I immediately recognized
Elaine Gottschall's book as a potential godsend to my
patients. Its value lay in providing a palatable but potent
alternative to those dietary approaches commonly in use for
management of gastrointestinal problems: the high-fiber diet;
the low-fat diet; the low-residue diet; the anti-yeast diet; the
gluten-free diet; and other elimination diets.
                                 i
                            Foreword


         Based on my experience with patients, I already had
reason to question the complex carbohydrate plan as the
most healthy eating program, especially for patients with
gastrointestinal complaints. Many gastroenterologists, like most
North American physicians, propound this "low-cholesterol"diet
plan. Fat, it is reasoned, is the bane not only of arteries but also
of the intestinal tract: in combination with excess animal protein,
so it is said, fat sets the stage for a host of Western ills from
diverticulosis to appendicitis and colon cancer.
         Unquestionably, some patients are excellent fiber
responders, but others do poorly with common sources of
roughage. The radical alternative, a meat and salad diet that
eliminates all sugars and starches, is unpalatable and unen-
forceable for all but the most dedicated patients. In fact, this
strict vegetable and protein diet, sometimes referred to a s
the "caveman diet", is dangerous for marginally nourished,
underweight patients with Crohn's disease or ulcerative coli-
tis.
         One oversimplification Elaine Gottschall's book
avoids is the notion that food allergy is the source of many
gastrointestinal complaints. Since dietary manipulation can
produce results, it is, perhaps, natural to assume this. But over-
reliance on the ambiguous results of allergy testing leaves many
patients incompletely treated. The more sophisticated belief that
it is not individual foods themselves but the byproducts of inges-
tion of certain foods that cause intestinal problems is fast replac-
ing the concept of food allergy.
         This theory was first set forth by Dr. 1.0.Hunter in a
landmark Lancet article in 199 1. Elaine Gottschall's "Specific
Carbohydrate Diet" is an acknowledgement of Hunter's theory.
Another recent Lancet article underscores the frequency of intol-
erances to corn, wheat, milk, potatoes, and rye. This may be the
reason why patients who derive inconsistent benefits from the
gluten-free and lactose-free diets respond so completely to the
regimen set forth in Elaine Gottschall's book. This diet addresses
carbohydrate intolerance more broadly than other approaches.
The second edition of Food and the Gut Reaction, Breaking the
Vicious Cycle: Intestinal health Through Diet, should be among
the vital resources of every gastroenterologist.
                          Foreword


        Other corrective strategies amount to a preoccupation
with eradicating intestinal pathogens. Those who take this
approach believe in the "find a bug, use a drug" philosophy.
Elaine Gottschall substitutes the more holistic goal of re-
establishing the healthy balance of intestinal flora.
        As I began placing patients on the "Specific
Carbohydrate Diet", using Food and the Gut Reaction a s a
comprehensive guide, I became impressed with the results.
Many patients with Crohn's disease,ulcerative colitis, irrita-
ble bowel syndrome and even refractory constipation, found
relief although their progress had been stymied previously
with elaborate but unsuccessful elimination schemes. The
clinical value of the "Specific Carbohydrate Diet" was
unquestionable, but interestingly, I began to notice other
unanticipated benefits. Patients with muscle aches, stiff
joints, and even full-blown arthritis, chronic skin rashes,
psoriasis, generalized fatigue and "spaciness" were alleviat-
ed. Elaine Gottschall's diet had probably reduced intestinal
toxicity.
        Unfortunately, the chances of wider acceptance of
dietary approaches like this one are small. While many of
my innovative, nutritionally-oriented colleagues have
availed themselves of Food and the Gut Reaction and intro-
duced patients to this approach, most gastroenterologists
are, sadly, not even curious. They scarcely acknowledge the
role diet can play. For example, a recent Lancet article
demonstrating the efficacy of the exclusion diet in the treat-
ment of Crohn's disease has not prompted a single gastroen-
terologist in my large metropolitan community to administer
a facsimile of the successful diet to patients - even when
their diseases do not respond to the most skillfully adminis-
tered drug treatment.
        Fortunately, increasing numbers of patients are rec-
ognizing the need to break away from total dependency on
drugs and symptom-oriented medical care. Many have
endured years of suffering, coupled with economic and men-
tal stress, and they are willing to try a wholesome diet,
grounded in medical research, which makes sense. The
reception given to Food and the Gut Reaction (the first
                          Foreword


edition of this book) by patients has the makings of a true
grassroots uprising. Patients, en masse, are willing to try the
diet and many are finding that it works.
       Elaine Gottschall is a tireless crusader on behalf of
her natural approach to digestive problems. She selflessly
gives of her time, love, compassion, attention, and concern
to patients and clinicians alike. She has become an energetic
cheerleader for many of my patients and has provided
invaluable direction when progress has faltered. Her reward
is surely the secure knowledge that she has made a
difference in the lives of thousands of patients with
gastrointestinal disorders.

                  Ronald L. Hoffman, M.D.
                  Hoffman Center
                  40 East 30th St.
                  New York, New York
                  10016
                  June, 1994
                         Chapter 1

                PAST AND PRESENT



       In 1951, after many years of clinical experience, Drs.
Sidney V. and Merrill P. Haas published a book entitled
Management of Celiac Disease. Directed to the medical
community, the book documented the doctors' experiences in
treating and curing hundreds of cases of celiac disease a s
well as cases of cystic fibrosis of the pancreas.' Their
approach was dietary, and they used a well-balanced, normal
diet that was highly specific as to the types of sugars and
starches allowed. When patients followed this Specific
Carbohydrate Diet for a minimum of one year, they were
then able to return to a normal diet with complete and
permanent disappearance of symptoms.
       In 1958, we took our eight year old daughter to the
Drs. Haas. Three years before she had been diagnosed by
specialists as having incurable ulcerative colitis and her
condition was deteriorating. The years of treatment with
cortisone and sulfonamides, plus innumerable other medical
approaches, had been unsuccessful and surgery seemed
imminent. The Drs. Haas placed her on the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet and within two years she was free of
symptoms. She returned to eating normally after another few
years, and has remained in excellent health for over twenty
years.
       Many students, friends, and others whom I have seen
in my practice who were suffering from ulcerative colitis,
Crohn's disease, celiac disease (not cured by a gluten free
diet), diverticulitis, and various types of chronic diarrhea
have tried the Haas Diet and most of them are now free of
their respective diseases. Some of the most dramatic and
fastest recoveries have occurred in babies and young
2                          Chapter 1


children with severe constipation and among children who,
along with intestinal problems, had serious behavior prob-
lems. These included autistic-type hypoactivity a s well a s
hyperactivity, often accompanied by severe and prolonged
night terrors. Very often the behavior problems and night
terrors cleared within ten days after initiation of the Haas
Specific Carbohydrate Diet. It is interesting to note that in
June, 1985, the Schizophrenia Association of Great Britain
launched a research project to investigate Dr. F. C. Dohan's
research concerning a relationship between celiac disease and
schizophrenia. The basis for this project is a strict grain-free,
milk-free, low sugar diet, closely related to the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet.2,3
       Meanwhile in research laboratories throughout the
world, investigators have been studying intestinal problems.
Physicians and researchers have found that a special type of
synthetic diet (chemical nutrients assembled in the
laboratory) called an Elemental Diet shows great promise in
the treatment of digestive and intestinal problems of all
types. The malabsorption problem seen in cystic fibrosis of
the pancreas as well a s diarrhea which occurs after cancer
chemotherapy have been overcome by the use of the syn-
thetic Elemental Diet.4,5When used for patients with Crohn's
disease, not only did symptoms disappear but children who
had not grown properly for years showed dramatic weight
and height gains while on the diet.6 The level of sodium
chloride in the perspiration (the sweat test which measures
the severity of the condition) of children with cystic fibrosis
of the pancreas decreased dramatically when these children
were given the Elemental Diet.' Over six hundred scientific
publications have appeared in medical journals in the 1970's
and early 1980's testifying to the fact that this Elemental
Diet is effective in correcting mal-absorption and reversing
the course of many intestinal disorder^.^ However, since the
Elemental Diet is an artificial diet, usually administered via a
stomach tube, it cannot be continued indefinitely. When it is
discontinued, usually after six to eight weeks, improvement
gradually decreases and symptoms usually return.
                                Past and Present                 3



       The common denominator underlying the effective-
ness of both the natural Specific Carbohydrate Diet and the
synthetic Elemental Diet is the type of carbohydrate which
predominates. In the synthetic Elemental Diet, the principal
carbohydrate is the single sugar, glucose, which, in
biochemical circles, is called a monosaccharide (mono=one;
saccharide=sugar) a s contrasted with a two-sugar
disaccharide such as sucrose (table sugar) or a many-sugar
polysaccharide such as starch.

Each Circle                                                A
Represents a
Single Sugar Molecule




 1. Monosaccharide




 2. Disaccharide
                                       3. Polysaccharide   $-/

                     Figure 1      Dietary carbohydrates

        In the natural Specific Carbohydrate Diet, the carbo-
hydrates are also predominantly single sugars - those found
in fruit, honey, properly-made yoghurt, and certain vegeta-
bles. The many research reports indicating that the synthetic
Elemental Diet is beneficial in intestinal diseases provide
support for the Specific Carbohydrate Diet which can be used
in the home.
        Those who choose to follow the Specific Carbohydrate
Diet need not feel deprived. Many of the delicious recipes in
4                          Chapter 1


this book could easily be part of any gourmet cookbook. The
fact that they are so appealing, however, in no way compromises
the underlying scientific reasoning: the carbohydrates specified
in the recipes are biochemically correct.
        The Specific Carbohydrate Diet presented in this book
is highly nutritious and well-balanced. It is safe and very
likely to be effective in overcoming many lingering and
vexing intestinal and digestive problems.
                            Chapter 2

  SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE RELATING TO DIET




        The distressing and debilitating intestinal problems
seen today have existed for centuries. The names given the
various conditions with the symptoms of diarrhea, excess
gas, loss of weight, excess mucus, cramping, blood loss, and
severe constipation have changed throughout the years. The
methods of diagnosis as well a s those of treatment and
management have also changed with time. But always, there
has been a strong underlying belief that diet is an important
factor to consider, not only in determining the causes of the
disorders, but also in their treatment and cure.
        The medical literature is rich with reports relating the
favorable effects of dietary changes on the course of intestinal
disease. As far back a s 300 A.D., a Roman physician
described in detail a diarrhea condition sounding like celiac
disease and suggested that fasting, along with the use of the
juice of the plantain, a member of the banana family, would
cure the disease.' In 1745, Prince Charles, the Young
Pretender to the throne of England, suffered from ulcerative
colitis and was said to have cured himself by adopting a
milk-free diet.2
        During the early 1900's, numerous physicians
brought further insight to our understanding of the effect of
food on intestinal problems. Dr. Christian Herter, a physician
and professor at Columbia University, noted that in every
case where children were wasting away with diarrhea and
debilitation, proteins were well tolerated, fats were handled
moderately well but carbohydrates (sugars and starches)
were badly tolerated. He stated that ingestion of some
carbohydrates almost invariably caused a relapse or a return
of diarrhea after a period of i m p r ~ v e m e n t . ~
                                                    About
                                                        ~ ~ that time,
6                          Chapter 2



Dr. Samuel Gee, another world-renowned children's specialist,
saw clearly several important facts that continue to be
missed by modern researchers. Dr. Gee said that if the
patient with intestinal disease could be cured at all, it would
have to be by means of diet.5 He added that milk was the
least suitable food during intestinal problems and that highly
starchy food (rice, corn, potatoes, grains) were unfit. Dr. Gee
stated, "We must never forget that what the patient takes
beyond his power to digest does harm." Any food, and
particularly carbohydrate, given to a person with intestinal
problems should, therefore, be a food that requires little or
no digestion so that the digestive process itself will not
stand in the way of the absorption of the carbohydrates.
Contrary to what some may think, undigested (and therefore,
unabsorbed) carbohydrates are not passing harmlessly
through the small intestine and colon and out in the feces
but, somehow and somewhere in the digestive tract, are
causing problems.
        There is much recent evidence to support the
hypothesis that the course of several forms of intestinal
problems can be favorably changed by manipulating the
types of carbohydrates ingested. Cystic fibrosis patients
have responded remarkably well to the removal of certain
carbohydrates from their diets, especially refined sugar
 (sucrose) and the milk sugar, lactose, a s well a s starch."-"
Lactose has been implicated over and over again in ulcerative
colitis, Crohn's disease, and other types of intestinal
disorders referred to a s "functional" diarrhea.loi3 The
removal of lactose from the diets of patients with these
problems has resulted in remarkable i m p r ~ v e r n e n t . ~ ~
        Crohn's disease research has yielded some dramatic
results relating to carbohydrates in the diet. In the 1980's
two reports appeared in the medical literature. The first
reported the results of Drs. Von Brandes and Lorenz-Meyer
of Marburg, West Germany who brought about remissions in
twenty patients with Crohn's disease by forbidding foods
and beverages containing refined carbohydrates, mainly
sucrose and s t a r c h . ' V n the second study involving twenty
patients with Crohn's disease, dietary changes involving the
                      Scientific Evidence                    7



elimination of specific foods, particularly cereals and dairy
products, resulted in sustained remissions. The physicians
conducting the research concluded that "dietary
manipulation might be an effective long-term therapeutic
strategy for Crohn's d i ~ e a s e . " ~ "
        A recent medical textbook on the subject of inflam-
matory bowel disease reported the results of twenty
worldwide studies on the eating patterns of patients with
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease prior to the onset of
symptoms and subsequent diagnosis. Two of three studies
on the dietary habits of ulcerative colitis patients showed a
high consumption of bread and potatoes along with a high
intake of refined sugar (sucrose). In one of the studies, a
large one comprised of 124 patients, it was concluded that "a
dietary factor in ulcerative colitis cannot be dismissed,
especially in relation to bread."26 In this same textbook, the
results of seventeen studies dealing with Crohn's disease
were reported and all studies found sucrose intake to be
higher in Crohn's patients than in people without Crohn's
disease. The author of the report stated:
        The consistency of this finding is remarkable consider-
    ing the variety of countries and methods used to carry out
    the studies.
        Among the patients in the seventeen studies reported,
it was found that sucrose intake varied from between 20% to
220% more in Crohn's patients than in people who did not
develop Crohn's disease.
        In concluding, Dr. Heaton, author of the report,
stated:
        The connection between Crohn's disease and a sugar-
    rich diet is proved beyond reasonable doubt. Apart from
    smoking, this is the strongest clue to an environmental
    etiology of the disease.26
        Dr. Claude Morin of Hospital Sainte-Justine, Quebec,
reported his results in treating four children who were
suffering from long-standing Crohn's disease.
        When Dr. Morin administered, via a stomach tube, a
synthetic elemental diet containing the monosaccharide
8                         Chapter 2


glucose (a single sugar) a s the main carbohydrate source,
the children showed remarkable gains in both height and
weight a s well a s remission of their symptoms.21 Unlike
sucrose, lactose, and starch, glucose requires no digestion
and is, therefore, more likely to be absorbed by the cells of
the small intestine. This "predigested" sugar can easily pass
through the intestinal absorptive cells, enter the blood-
stream, and nourish the body. Glucose in the synthetic
elemental diet as well as glucose found in fruits and honey is
not beyond the power of those with disturbed digestive
systems to absorb.
        Dr. Jan Van Eys of the University of Texas Cancer
Center reaffirmed this principle by stating:
        The gastrointestinal mucosa (surface) of children is
    especially prone to damage from diarrhea and, as a result,
    disaccharide intolerance. The development of disaccharide-
    deficient formulae and of elemental diets gave a means by
    which physicians could allow patients to recover without
    drastic measures.22
        Dr. Van Eys did not elaborate on the conditions that
lead to the inability to digest double sugars (disaccharides)
nor did he state how diarrhea is related to the problem of
disaccharide digestion. More recently, however, Dr. J. Ranier
Poley of Eastern Virginia Medical School has shown a link
between diarrhea and the inability to digest starch and
disaccharide sugars.23 By microscopically examining the
intestinal surface of patients with various forms of diarrhea,
Dr. Poley found that most patients have lost the ability to
digest disaccharides because of excessive mucus production
by intestinal cells. An abnormally thick layer of surface
mucus appears to be preventing contact between the
disaccharides and the digestive enzymes of the absorptive
cells. Sugars that need digestion cannot be processed and,
therefore, will not be absorbed to provide nourishment for
the individual. Dr. Poley has shown this phenomenon to take
place in those suffering with celiac disease (gluten-sensitive
enteropathy) , soy-protein intolerance, intolerance to cow's
milk protein, intractable diarrhea of infancy, chronic
diarrhea in children, parasitic infections of the intestine
                              Scien~JcEvidence                                 9



(Giardia), cystic fibrosis of the pancreas, and Crohn's
disease." Reasons for the production of excessive mucus
will be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter dealing
with intestinal microbes.
        Carbohydrates (sugars and starches) will be discussed
in Chapter 5 in order to understand how some are more likely
than others to escape digestion and, therefore, absorption. It
will become clear that when this occurs, they remain in the
intestinal tract and are utilized by the microbial world of the
intestine which depend on this available carbohydrate for

                                   Injury to
                                 small intestinal
                                    surface

      Increase in                                                 Impaired
        bacterial                                               digestion of
    by-products and                                            disaccharides
    mucus production


         r                          Flgure 2

                                 Chain of events




                  Bacterial                          Malabsorpt~on
                 overgrowth                         of d~sacchar~des




the energy the microbes need to live and multiply.24 Yeast
and bacteria change the carbohydrates in ways that can
injure the intestine which may respond to these microbial
by-products by secreting excessive mucus. A chain of events
(Figure 2) is then established.
        At present, it is difficult to pinpoint the first step that
triggers the cycle involving dietary carbohydrates and
intestinal microbial growth. As far back as 1922, in a speech
to the medical community entitled, "Faulty Food in Relation
to Gastrointestinal Disorders," Dr. Robert McCarrison warned
his colleagues that intestinal diseases were increasing. He
asked them to remember that microbes, often blamed for
intestinal disease, are dependent upon the conditions of life,
especially nutrition, which "frequently prepare the soil of the
10                          Chapter 2


body for the growth of these microorganisms."25It is reason-
able to believe that undigested, unabsorbed carbohydrates
remaining in the intestine can serve as "the soil of the body"
which encourages the growth of microorganisms involved in
intestinal disorders.
        In various conditions, a poorly-functioning intestine
can be easily overwhelmed by the ingestion of carbohydrates
which require numerous digestive processes. The result is an
environment that supports overgrowth of intestinal yeast and
bacteria thus either initiating the chain of events or perpetuating
it.
        The purpose of the Specific Carbohydrate Diet is to
deprive the microbial world of the intestine of the food it
needs to overpopulate. By using a diet which contains
predominantly "predigested" carbohydrates, the individual
with an intestinal problem can be maximally nourished
without over-stimulation of the intestinal microbial
population.
                               Chapter 3

INTESTINAL MICROBES: THE UNSEEN WORLD



      The two most hazardous things an astronaut
takes into his capsule on extendedflight are his
brain and his intestinalfora. f (Bengson)
    A man i s only what his microbes make him.
(Kopel~fl)~
        It is generally accepted among physicians and
researchers that during intestinal upsets and chronic
intestinal disease, the normal, harmonious state of balance
between intestinal microbes living in our gastrointestinal
tract is lost. It is important, therefore, that we have some
understanding of the inhabitants of our unseen world.
        Before birth, the human intestine is free of
 microbe^.^,^ From the moment of birth, however, a massive
invasion of the gastrointestinal tract takes place and it
soon becomes populated with various types of microbes
depending on the type of milk ingested a s well a s other
environmental factors. Some of the microbial growth
develops from contact with the mother's skin; some
originates from the air. If the infant is breastfed, more than
99% of all microbes in the intestine are of one type.3 As
other foods are introduced, the baby develops a wide variety
of bacteria.
        Studies have revealed that eventually more than four
hundred bacterial species live together in the human colon.52
The stomach and most of the small intestine do not normally

f intestinalflora - the vanous bacterial and other rnicroscopic~ormsqf
 I'e in the intestinal contents.
12                              Chapter 3



harbor more than a sparse population of microbial flora.
However, the number of microbes normalIy increases at the
lowest part of the small intestine, the ileum, because of its
close proximity to the microbial-rich colon.5
       In the healthy intestinal tract, intestinal microbes
appear to live in a state of balance; an overabundance of one




                                            --------Stomach

                                             ------- Pancreas
                                            ---Transverse       Colon

                                            - - - - -Jejunum
                                                (Mlddle of small ~ntesene)

                                            - - -Descending Colon




 Flgure 3   The ~ntest~nal
                        tract
             mtestnal Microbes: The Unseen World           13



type seems to be inhibited by the activities of other types.
This competition between microbes prevents any one type
from overwhelming the body with its waste products or
toxins. Another important protective factor which works to
maintain the sparse bacterial population of the stomach and
upper small intestine is the high acidity of the stomach's
hydrochloric acid in which microbes cannot usually survive.
In addition, normal peristalsis (waves of involuntary
muscular contractions) sweeps many microbes out of the
intestine to be lost in the feces, thereby, decreasing their
numbers.
       However, bacterial overgrowth in the stomach and
small intestine can and does occur for various reasons
among which are:
   (1) Interference with the high acidity of the stomach
       through the continual use of antacids;
   (2) A decrease in the acidity of the stomach such a s
       occurs in the aging process 6;
   (3) Malnutrition or a diet of poor quality, and the
       resulting weakening of the body's immune ~ y s t e m ~ , ~ ;
   (4) Antibiotic therapy which can cause a wide range of
       microbial changes. A microbe commonly residing in
       the intestine without harmful effects may undergo
       a wide range of changes a s a result of antibiotic
       the rap^.^

       Once the normal equilibrium of the colon is disturbed
for any reason, its microbes can migrate into the small intes-
tine and stomach hampering digestion, competing for nutri-
ents, and overloading the intestinal tract with their waste
prod~cts.~   Quite early in bacterial overgrowth of the small
intestine, the normal absorption of vitamin Biz is disturbed.
There is considerable evidence that B12, is poorly absorbed
when microbes multiplying within the small intestine pre-
vent uptake by the i l e ~ m . ' ~ . ' ~
        There has been a long history indicating that bacteria
and yeast are involved in intestinal disease. As far back a s
1904, a n examination of the stools of children who were
14                         Chapter 3



suffering with what appeared to be celiac disease, revealed
abnormally large numbers of fermentative (carbohydrate
"eaters") and putrefactive (protein "eaters") bacteria which
were, undoubtedly, contributing to the disease process. The
physicians making this observation proposed that although
the normal intestine controlled the growth of bacteria, in
"celiac-type" cases some intestinal abnormality prevented
the normal regulatory control.14
        Early researchers working on ulcerative colitis
believed this disorder to be caused by bacteria. From 1906 to
1924, numerous researchers isolated certain types of bacte-
ria, injected either the bacteria or the bacterial toxins into
laboratory animals, and claimed that the injections produced
ulcerative colitis in the animals.15--'"n 1932, when Dr. B.B.
Crohn spoke about a "new" intestinal disorder which he
called regional ileitis (now known as Crohn's disease), some
physicians attending his lecture stated that this new disease
entity might be due to microorgani~rns.~~
        From the 1920's until the present, the role of
microbes and the products they produce continues to be
investigated in an effort to find the cause of the various
forms of inflammatory bowel d i ~ e a s e . " - ~ V f t e n
                                                         there has
been very convincing evidence that particular bacteria could
initiate a certain type of intestinal disease but, eventually,
the work has been dismissed because of insufficient proof.
Some of the difficulties which these investigators experi-
enced in trying to pinpoint the "culprit" microbes were
undoubtedly due to the ever-changing conditions of the
microbial world of the intestine, to variability in the strains
of intestinal microbes, or to the lack of precise laboratory
techniques of identification.
        During these early years of investigation, Dr. Ilya
Metchnikoff proposed that bacteria in the intestine were pro-
ducing toxins which were then absorbed into the blood-
stream. These toxins, Metchnikoff stated, were the cause of
many human afflictions, and he named the process by which
harmful microbes in the intestine cause disease, "autointox-
i~ation".~' Unlike investigators who unsuccessfully attempt-
ed to find the precise microorganisms involved in the
             mteshhal Microbes: The Unseen World              15



various types of intestinal disorders, Metchnikoff
approached the problem quite differently. He maintained, a s
many others have done, that if the intestinal environment
can be kept in a healthy state, harmful microbes will no
longer be a threate30
        He advocated the widespread use of acidified (fer-
mented) milk, similar to yoghurt, and proposed that the ben-
eficial bacteria used in producing the fermented milk, and
still remaining therein, would enter the intestinal tract and
prevent other bacteria in the intestine from forming harmful
toxins. While Metchnikoff's proposal has not been univer-
sally adopted, his ideas are acknowledged by outstanding
gastroenterologists and researchers. In 1964, Dr. Donaldson
stated in a lengthy article about the role of bacteria in intes-
tinal disease, 'in certain respects the concept of
autointoxication offered by Metchnikoff must now receive
serious reconsideration.I2
        Investigators continue to be fascinated by
Metchnikoff's proposals and to study the potential benefits
of acidified milk. Modern researchers are asking: Do the bac-
teria used to ferment the milk actually take up residence in
the intestine and, if so, for how long? Which of the
"yoghurt-type" bacteria used to acidify milk will counteract
toxins produced by other intestinal                 Is the bacte-
ria used to acidify the milk or the acidified (fermented) milk
itself the beneficial factor?29
        In the 1980's an increasing number of reports have
been published stating that intestinal bacterial toxins appear
to be injuring intestinal cells and, as a result, causing a vari-
ety of diarrheal diseases. Some of the bacteria producing
these toxins have not, in the past, been considered to be dis-
ease-causing types.' Although there is still insufficient evi-
dence to link a specific microbe to each of the chronic
intestinal disorders, it is generally agreed that intestinal
microbes are not innocent bystanders.
        A simple approach to minimizing the undesirable
activities of intestinal microbes would seem to be through
the use of antibiotics. This approach is often tried but,
16                         Chapter 3



unfortunately, in most chronic intestinal disorders, it has
 limitation^.^^ 48
         We are faced, then, with intestinal disorders which
involve microbial populations which have been altered in
number, in kind, or both. The normal contractions (peristal-
sis) of the intestinal muscles are not able to remove them;
they appear to be tenacious. Indeed, there is evidence that
intestinal microbes will not cause disease unless they devel-
op methods of adhering to the gut ~ a l l . ~ ~ " O
                                              Antibiotic therapy
is of limited usefulness while other drugs of the cortisone
and sulfa families have side-effects if continued too long.
         A sensible and harmless form of warfare on the aber-
rant population of intestinal microbes is to manipulate their
energy (food) supply through diet. Most intestinal microbes
require carbohydrates for energy," and the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet severely limits the availability of carbohy-
drates. By depriving intestinal microbes of their energy
source, their numbers gradually decrease along with the
products they produce.
                                      Chapter 4

            BREAKING THE VICIOUS CYCLE



       Of all dietary components, carbohydrate has the
major influence over intestinal microbes. Through a process
of fermentation of available carbohydrates remaining in the
intestinal tract, microbes obtain energy for continued rnain-
tenance and growth.'
       The fermentation process by which intestinal
microbes consume dietary carbohydrates is diagrammed
below:
                                                               Carbon dioxide gas


                                                        f      Hydrogen gas
                                                               Methane gas
                                                               Sometimes alcohol

                                                       /
 Bacteria and
                                                     / Acetic
                                                       Lactic acid
                                                              acid
                                                     )+
                                                     \
                                                       Other microb~a!
                                                       by-products


                        Undigested sugar molecule
                        remaining in the intestine         \   Energy for
                                                               microbial growth

 Figure 4   Intestinal fermentation


       Fermentation is encouraged when the diet contains
carbohydrates which remain in the intestinal tract rather
than being absorbed into the b l ~ o d s t r e a m . ~
                                                    Unabsorbed car-
bohydrates constitute the most important source of gas in
the intestine. For example, the lactose contained in one
ounce of milk, if undigested and unabsorbed, will produce
about 50 ml of gas in the intestine of normal people. But
under abnormal conditions when intestinal microbes have
18                                       Chapter 4



moved into the small intestine, the hydrogen gas production
may be increased over one hundred-fold.
        The presence of undigested and unabsorbed carbohy-
drates within the small intestine can encourage microbes
from the colon to take up residence in the small intestine and
to continue to multiply. This, in turn, may lead to the forma-
tion of products, in addition to gas, which injure the small
intestine. Examples are lactic, acetic, and other acids (Fig. 4)
which are short-chain organic acids resulting from the fer-
mentative process. In addition to the damage to the intes-
tine, there is a growing body of scientific evidence that lactic
acid formed from fermentation in the intestine causes abnor-
mal brain function and b e h a ~ i o r , ~ ,
                                         which
                                             ~ . ~could account for
the behavioral problems which often accompany intestinal
disorders. This would also explain the dramatic improve-
ments in behavior noted in Chapter 1: the formation of large
amounts of lactic acid resulting from the fermentation of
unabsorbed carbohydrates is prevented by following the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet.

     Figure 5    The vicious cycle


                                     b     Chronic       4
                                           diarrhea
                                                                I
                                                             Increased
                                                             metabolic




      Water drawn                        INTESTINAL
      into intestine

           A




                                     4
                                         Carbohydrate
                                         malabsorption          1
                    Breaking the Vicious Qcle                   19



         The production of large amounts of short-chain
organic acids by bacterial fermentation in the intestine may
ultimately prove to be an important clue in discovering the
cause of some forms of inflammatory bowel disease.
         A recently published paper in Science entitled "Grain
Feeding and the Dissemination of Acid-Resistant
Escherichia coli from Cattle" casts a new perspective on the
effect of these organic acids in changing bacterial character-
istics." Since the early 1980's medical research has shown
that some forms of ulcerative colitis appear to be caused by a
commonly-found intestinal bacterium, Escherichia coli,
which, as a result of a change in its characteristics (a muta-
tion), has developed the ability to produce d i ~ e a s e . ' ~ - - ~
Although there are numerous reasons a s to why harmless
forms of bacteria might change their characteristics through
genetic mutation, the question could be asked: Is the fer-
mentation of undigested, unabsorbed starch by intestinal
bacteria in the human colon causing an acidic environment
which could cause harmless bacteria to change to harmful
forms?
         Once bacteria multiply within the small intestine, the
chain of events diagrammed in Figure 5 develops into a
vicious cycle characterized by an increase in the production
of gas, acids and other products of fermentation which per-
petuate the malabsorption problem and prolong the intestin-
al d i ~ o r d e r . ~
         Bacterial growth in the small intestine appears to
destroy the enzymes on the intestinal cell surface preventing
carbohydrate digestion and absorption and making carbohy-
drates available for further f e r m e n t a t i ~ n .It~ is at this point
that production of excessive mucus may be triggered a s a
self-defense mechanism whereby the intestinal tract
attempts to "lubricate" itself against the mechanical and
chemical injury caused by the microbial toxins, acids, and
the presence of incompletely digested and unabsorbed carbo-
hydrates.
         The Specific Carbohydrate Diet presents a method for
breaking the cycle by maximally nourishing the individual
and minimally nourishing the intestinal microbes. By this
20                         Chapter 4



method, undesirable stresses on the intestine decrease. The
diet is based on the principle that specifically selected carbo-
hydrates, requiring minimal digestive processes (as will be
discussed in Chapter 5) are absorbed and leave virtually
none to be used for furthering microbial growth in the intes-
tine. As the microbial population decreases due to lack of
food, its harmful by-products also decrease, freeing the
intestinal surface of injurious substances. No longer needing
protection, the mucus-producing cells stop producing exces-
sive mucus, and carbohydrate digestion is improved.
Malabsorption is replaced by absorption. As the individual
absorbs energy and nutrients, all the cells of the body are
properly nourished, including the cells of the immune sys-
tem, which then can assist in overcoming the microbial inva-
sion. The practical Specific Carbohydrate Diet aims for the
same goals a s the clinical synthetic Elemental Diet: the
reduction and change of bacterial growth and the mainte-
nance of the optimum nutritional state of the ~atient.~.'O
                         Chapter 5

           CARBOHYDRATE DIGESTION



    Digestion is the great secret of lre. (Go and
Summerskill)
      What the patient takes beyond his ability to
digest does harm. fGeel2
        While the underlying causes of the various intestinal
disorders cannot be stated with certainty, faulty digestion
and malabsorption of dietary carbohydrates may be, in large
part, responsible for these disorders. (Carbohydrate refers to
starch and disaccharide sugar molecules; both require diges-
tion before absorption.) As we have seen in previous chap-
ters, this can lead to more serious malabsorption of all
nutrients due to injury to the intestinal surface. The Specific
Carbohydrate Diet most often corrects malabsorption allow-
ing nutrients to enter the bloodstream and be made available
to the cells of the body thereby strengthening the immune
system's ability to fight. Further debilitation is prevented,
weight can return to normal, and, ultimately, there is a
return to health.
        Malabsorption is the inability of the cells of the body
to obtain nutrients from foods eaten. As a result, the caloric
energy, vitamins, and minerals are lost a s all parts of the
body are deprived of the proper nourishment. There are
many places in the gastrointestinal tract where problems
could lead to malabsorption: (1) if food travels too rapidly
through the intestinal tract (as happens most often when
diarrhea is present), there is insufficient time for large food
molecules such as starch, fat, and protein to be broken down
by various enzymes and, consequently, their absorption into
22                                  Chapter 5


the bloodstream is seriously impaired; (2) if a poorly-func-
tioning pancreas does not deliver sufficient digestive
enzymes to the small intestine to break down large rnole-
cules of protein, fat, and starch, absorption of these nutri-
ents will not take place.
        However, a large number of research reports point to
a later step in digestion a s the site leading to malabsorption
in many intestinal                         This last step in the
digestive process occurs at the microvilli of the cell mem-
branes of the intestinal absorptive cell.




                     Microvilli               splitting       0 0
                                              enzymes, the    0 0
                                              disaccharidases
                                              (solid circles)  Oo
                                                               0 Completely
                                                                 O digested
     Dietary                                                       d~saccharides
     disaccharides                                                 now enter the
                                                                   bloodstream
                                                 Nucleus



 Figure 6   Tall, healthy, mature intest~nalabsorptive cell




       The membranes of cells lining the intestinal tract
serve a s more than a passive barrier between the contents of
the digestive tract and the bloodstream. When the digestive
system is functioning normally, the membranes of these
"gatekeeper" cells actively participate in the last step of
digestion as well a s aiding in the transport of nutrients into
the bloodstream.
       The last step in carbohydrate digestion takes place at
the minute projections called microvilli (Fig. 6 ) . Only those
carbohydrates which have been properly processed by the
enzymes embedded in the microvilli can cross over the barri-
er and enter the b l o ~ d s t r e a m . ~
                                        This is where the milk sugar,
lactose, and sucrose, are split apart (digested). This is also
                  Figure 7        Digestion of dietary carbohydrates
                                                        Enzymes of
                                                         intestinal
                                    Disaccharides      cell microvilli     Monosaccharides
                                   (Double sugars)   (Disaccharidases)      (Single sugars)


                                                       Maltase


           Digestive Enzymes
                                     Maltose
                                                          *              Glucose + Glucose

STARCH                                                lsomaltase
         of Saliva and Pancreas
         2                           lsomaltose               -Glucose + Glucose

                                                       Sucrase
                                     Sucrose                             Glucose + Fructose

                                                       Lactase
                                     Lactose         A Glucose + Galactose
24                                Chapter 5


the site of the last step in the digestion of starch from such
foods such as grains and potatoes. Figure 7 summarizes the
steps involved in carbohydrate digestion in the gastrointesti-
nal tract and lists the microvilli enzymes which carry out the
last step of the digestive process.
        The structure of the intestinal surface is dramatically
altered during intestinal disease4 and, as a result, digestive
activity is seriously inhibited. This makes the last step in
the digestion of these carbohydrates difficult, if not
impos~ible~      (Fig.
                   -~~ 8)~ ~ ~




                                           few or no
                                           enzymes
                                                            Undigested
     Dietary                                                disaccharides
     disaccharides                                          remain in
                      Nucleus                               intestine



 Figure 8    Flattened, injured, immature absorptive cell


       The location of the sugar-splitting enzymes, the dis-
accharidases, in the membranes of the intestinal cells makes
them very vulnerable to damage from many sources. A vita-
min deficiency of folic acid,29for example, and/or of B I Z , can
prevent proper development of the microvilli which carry the
disaccharidases. An abnormally thick layer of mucus pro-
duced by the intestinal cells can prevent contact between the
microvilli enzymes and the disaccharides lactose, sucrose,
maltose and i s ~ m a l t o s e .In~ addition, irritating or toxic sub-
stances produced by yeast, bacteria, or parasites which have
invaded the small intestinal tract can cause damage to the
intestinal cell membranes, destroying their enzymes.I3
       Conditions involving the small intestine that are fre-
quently associated with deficiencies of lactase and other dis-
accharidases are celiac disease, malnutrition, tropical sprue,
cholera, gastroenteritis, infant diarrhea from any cause, pel-
lagra, irritable colon, post-gastrectomy (removal of part of
                   CarbohydrateDlgesaon                 25



stomach) , I 4 soy protein intolerance, intolerance to cow's milk
protein, intractable diarrhea of infancy, parasitic infections
of the intestine, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease.4~5~s14,16~18
In addition, lactase deficiency in ulcerative colitis is well
documented as was noted in Chapter 2.
        The first enzyme to suffer damage is usually lactase,
but often there is a combination of enzyme loss involving
sucrase, isomaltase, and, less often, maltase." The enzyme,
lactase, is depressed earlier than the other disaccharide-
splitting enzymes in intestinal disturbances such as celiac
disease (and other conditions where diarrhea is present) and
is the last of the microvilli enzymes to return to normal after
intestinal disease has subsided. In fact, lactase may be per-
manently depressed after severe malnutrition and tropical
diarrhea (sprue) and a deficiency of lactase may be the sole
legacy of some previous disorders."
        It is difficult to prove the absence of disaccharidase
activity by present medical techniques. A biopsy sample of
the small intestine during intestinal disease may show that
enzyme activity of disaccharidases is normal. However, upon
feeding lactose, sucrose, and starch, cramping, diarrhea, and
vomiting will follow. This apparent contradiction could be
due to a lack of contact between the enzymes and sugars
caused by the mucus barrier referred to in Chapters 2 and 3.
        When a biopsy sample does indicate that there is a
deficiency of disaccharidase enzyme activity, the reason
could be a primary genetic problem or a secondary problem
caused by a direct injury to the intestinal cell surface with
loss of the microvilli and a flattening of the cell itself.
Among those factors which lead to injuries of the intestinal
surface are malnutrition and irritation caused by substances
produced by microbial growth.l5.l6
        The sugars, then, remain undigested in the small
                Their presence in the lumen (interior space) of
the intestine causes a reversal of the normal nutritional
process. Instead of nutrients flowing from the intestinal
space into the bloodstream, water is drawn into the intestin-
al lumen (Fig. 5). The water, carrying nutrients, is lost in
abnormal intestinal function (diarrhea) and the cells of the
26                         Chapter 5



body are deprived of energy, minerals, and vitamins. Most
seriously, the sugars remaining in the intestinal lumen
provide energy for further fermentation and growth of intes-
tinal microbes.
        The increasing levels of irritating substances given
off by the growing microbial population cause intestinal cells
to defend themselves. Mucus-producing cells (goblet cells)
which are normally present in the intestine secrete their
product to cover and protect the naked free surface of the
intestinal absorptive cells. The small intestine responds to a
disruption of the normal balance by producing more goblet
cells which increases the secretion of intestinal mucus. As
the integrity of the small intestine is further threatened by
the microbial invasion and by the products it produces, a
thick mucus barrier forms for self defense. The enzymes
embedded within the absorptive cell membranes cannot do
the job for which they are designed: to make contact with
and split certain sugars in the diet.*
        If the goblet cells become exhausted (and there is a
limit to their valiant efforts to defend the absorptive lining
against irritation), the "naked" intestinal surface is subject
to further ravaging. It is very possible that, a t this stage,
ulceration of the intestinal surface, a s seen in ulcerative coli-
tis, can occur. This might also explain how certain proteins
such a s gluten can inappropriately enter the interior of the
absorptive cells and destroy them.
        Sometimes, but not often, even the absorption of sin-
gle sugars is disturbed because of severe injury to the
absorptive cells, but this extreme condition is usually diag-
nosed by routine hospital tests.18 Sometimes, the invasion of
microbes into the small intestine is so pervasive that yeast,
for example, will be found in the esophagus.19 When it is
suspected that yeast invasion is widespread (the oral infec-
tion, thrush, would be an indicator) it is wise to cut back on
honey ingestion a t the beginning of the dietary regimen
 (amount of honey in recipes should be decreased by at least
75%). The amount of honey may be increased a s the condi-
tion improves.
                    CarbohydrateD~gestzon



        The indigestibility of starch by even healthy people is
only recently receiving attention (see descriptions of starch-
es following). Some starchy foods which were assumed to be
digested completely are, in fact, incompletely digested by
most p e ~ p l e . ~In~ ,
                       those
                          ~ ~ people with intestinal disorders,
the digestibility of starch is even further affected. Because
the breakdown of starch eventually results in the formation
of the disaccharides, maltose and isomaltose, most starches
must be avoided unless they are specified as permissible in
Chapter 9.
        Some foods in the Specific Carbohydrate Diet contain
starches which have been shown to be tolerated. These are
the starches of the legume family: dried beans, lentils and
split peas (no chick peas, soybeans or bean sprouts). The
legumes which are permitted must, however, be soaked for
at least 10-12 hours prior to cooking and the water discard-
ed since they contain other sugars which are indigestible but
which can be removed by soaking." The legumes may be
introduced in small amounts at about the third month of the
diet. The starches in all grains, corn, and potatoes must be
strictly avoided. Corn syrup is also excluded since it contains
a mixture of "short-chain" st arc he^.^^,^^

              Carbohydrates Found in Foods
1. Single Sugars (monosaccharides)
       These sugars require no further splitting in order to
be transported from the intestine into the bloodstream. They
are glucose, fructose, and galactose. Glucose and fructose
are found in honey, fruits, and some vegetables. Galactose is
found in lactose-hydrolyzed milk (LHM) and in yoghurt.
2. Double Sugars (disaccharides)
      These sugars require splitting by intestinal cell
enzymes. There are four main disaccharides: lactose,
sucrose, maltose, and isomaltose.
      Lactose is found in fluid milk, dried milk powder,
   commercial yoghurt, homemade yoghurt which has not
   been fermented for twenty-four hours, processed cheeses,
28                         Chapter 5



     cottage cheese, cream cheese, ice cream, some sour creams,
     whey (70% lactose by weight), and many products which
     have added milk solids or whey. Many drugs and vitamin
     and mineral supplements have added lactose.
         Sucrose is table sugar and is found in processed foods
     such a s gelatin desserts, ketchup, cereals, many canned
     foods and some frozen preparations (see Appendix). There
     is a small amount of sucrose (about 1%-3%)in some
     pasteurized honey but it has been shown to be tolerated by
     those on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet. Unpasteurized
     honey contains virtually no sucrose since an enzyme in the
     honey splits whatever sucrose may be present. Some fruits
     and nuts contain small amounts of sucrose but they may be
     used and have been included in Chapter 9. As fruits ripen,
     some of the sucrose they may contain is split by enzymes
     within the fruit.
         Maltose and Isomaltose are found in sources such as
     corn syrup, malted milk, and candies. However, most of the
     maltose and isomaltose which is presented to the intestinal
     cells for digestion comes from dietary starches. Starches
     are long chains of glucose molecules (Fig. 9) which are
     digested, in part, by enzymes from the pancreas and saliva
     and are left a s the disaccharides, maltose and isomaltose,
     to be split by microvilli enzymes of intestinal cells.

3. Starch (polysaccharides)
       Starch can be of two types called amylose and amy-
lopectin. Most vegetables contain both types in various pro-
portions. For example, some kinds of rice contain small
amounts of amylopectin starch and large amounts of amy-
lose starch. Other types of rice contain only amylopectin
starch.25 Like rice, some genetic strains of corn contain a
very highly branched amylopectin type of starch. Sweet
potatoes or yams also contain only amylopectin starch. It
appears that genetic breeding which attempts to change the
protein content of certain crops also affects the types of
starch formed by the plant." The varying proportions of dif-
ferent kinds of starch might affect the ability of the intestine
                          Carbohydrate Dlgesrion                         29



to completely digest them. Or, the proteins of certain plants
may prevent the starch from being completely split.27(It is
interesting to note that one group of researchers have found
that some intestinal bacteria are made more virulent by the
presence of undigested cornstarch in the intestineeZ6)
       Vegetables that contain more amylose than
amylopectin starch are simpler to digest, because the glucose
units which make up all starch molecules are arranged in a
linear fashion in amylose starch and are readily exposed to
digestive enzymes from saliva and the pancreas (Fig. 9). The
links holding the glucose units in these linear arrays are




             AMY LOSE                                AMYLOPECTIN
Zach small circle in the above diagrams represents a glucose molecule.

Figure 9    Starches


split until the chains are reduced to only two chemically
linked glucose molecules called maltose. By comparison,
amylopectin molecules contain glucose units which form
branches (Figs. 9 and 10). When the amylopectin molecules
have been partially digested by pancreatic enzymes, the
fragments remaining for the last step in digestion by
microvilli enzymes are both maltose and isomaltose.
        Recently, Dr. Gunja-Smith and associates proposed
that the amylopectin starch molecule is even more highly
branched than was thought originally.28
        According to Dr. Gunja-Smith's diagram, the interior
branches appear less exposed than the exterior branches. It
is, therefore, possible that pancreatic digestive enzymes can
30                           Chapter 5


not reach the interior links and that parts of the amylopectin
starch molecules escape digestion, remain in the intestine,
and increase microbial fermention.




Figure 10   Revised diagram of arnylopectin starch


      At present, very limited information is available as to
the amounts of amylopectin and amylose starch present in
the many kinds of grains and other starchy foods.

       Fiber. Fruits, vegetables, nuts, and grains contain
various components, termed fiber, which are indigestible by
the enzymes of the digestive tract. Fiber from fruits, nuts,
vegetables, including dried legumes, is allowed on the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet but all other fiber from grains,
including bran, is not permitted.
                          Chapter 6

                    The Celiac Story



The last rime anyone counted, there were 15,000named diseases
o f man, and curesfr 5,000 ofthem. Yet it remains the dream o f
everyyoung doctor to discover a new disease. That is theJhtest
and surest way to gain prominence within the medical prg7es-
sion. Practi'cally speaking, it is much better to discover a new
disease than toJnd a curefor an old one; your cure will be
tested, disputed and argued overforyears while a new disease is
readily and rapidly accepted. (Michael Cr'chton)'


       Celiac disease appears to have always existed.
Because its numerous symptoms mimic those of several
other conditions and because an obvious cause has been
elusive throughout the years, its recognition a s a distinct
disorder and one which physicians could readily diagnose
has been fraught with disagreement.
       One of the first descriptions of this disorder was
given in the early years of the Roman empire by the physi-
cian, Aretaeus, who refers to "Coeliac disease" a s a chronic
diarrhea condition consisting of undigested food, lasting an
extended period, and a debilitation of the whole body.2
       Aretaeus described the diarrhea a s being light in
color, offensive in odor and accompanied by flatulence.
Additionally, the patient is described a s "emaciated and
atrophied, pale, feeble, incapable of performing any of his
accustomed works."
       In 1855, Dr. Gull writing in Guy's Hospital report^,^
outlined the symptoms found in a 13 year-old boy that clear-
ly suggest celiac disease as we understand it today: enlarged
32                          Chapter 6



abdomen, frequent and voluminous stools of a dull, chalky
color.
       A few years later, in 1888, Dr. Samuel Gee laid the
foundation for not only describing the condition, but also
establishing criteria for diagnosis. Additionally, he estab-
lished guidelines for successfully treating the condition with
a dietary approach. In Samuel Gee's classic report, "On the
Coeliac Affection," he wrote:
        There is a kind of chronic indigestion which is met with
    in persons of all ages, yet is especially apt to affect children
    between one and five years old. Signs of the disease are
    yielded by the faeces; being loose, not formed, but not
    watery; more bulky than the food taken would seem to
    account for; pale in colour, a s if devoid of bile, yeasty,
    frothy, a n appearance due to fermentation; stench often
    very great, the food having undergone putrefaction rather
    than concoction. The causes of the disease are obscure.
    Children who suffer from it are not all weak in constitution.
    Errors in diet may perhaps be a cause, but what error?4
        Despite the meagerness of Gee's information about
celiac disease, he saw clearly several important facts that
escaped many later investigations:

     (1) If the patient can be cured at all, it must be by means
         of diet and that cow's milk is the least suited kind of
         food, that highly starchy food, rice, sago, corn-flour,
         are unfit.
     (2) We must never forget that what the patient takes
         beyond his power of digestion does harm. (Gee
         implied that unfit foods played more than a negative
         role and actually produced a pathologic condition in
         the digestive tract.)

       For many years there were numerous reports on the
cause a s well a s the treatment for what appeared to be celiac.
While these inconsistent and inconclusive reports appeared
in Europe, there was much less interest in North America.
Shortly after the turn of the century, however, Drs. L.
                        m e Celiac Slay                     33



Emmett Holt, Sr., Director of Children's Medicine at Bellevue
Hospital and Christian Herter of Columbia University worked
together for over 7 years on the clinical a s well a s the theo-
retical aspects of this disorder. Their conclusions, published
in 1 908, entitled On Infantilism from Chronic Intestinal
I n z i o n included the following main points:

   ( 1 ) There is a pathological state of childhood marked by
       a striking retardation in growth of the skeleton, the
       muscles, and the various organs and associated with
       a chronic intestinal infection characterized by the
       overgrowth and persistence of bacterial flora belong-
       ing normally to the nursling period.
   (2) The chief manifestations of this intestinal infantilism
       are arrest in the development of the body but mainte-
       nance of good mental powers and a fair development
       of the brain; marked abdominal distention; a slight
       or moderate or considerable degree of simple anemia;
       the rapid onset of physical and mental fatigue; irreg-
       ularities of intestinal digestion resulting in frequent
       diarrheal s e i z ~ r e s . ~

        Drs. Holt and Herter continued in their monograph to
describe the dominant bacteria found in the stools a s well a s
some of the by-products of intestinal fermentation and
putrefaction. They noted that fat appeared in the stool and
attributed this to impaired fat absorption. Also, note was
made of increased mucus in the stool along with evidence of
abnormal shedding of intestinal cells. They continued to
stress that two leading features of this intestinal infantilism
must be further investigated: ( 1 ) the retardation of growth;
(2) the chronic intoxication. They commented that retarda-
tion in growth could be attributed to malabsorption of nutri-
ents and the malabsorption could probably be due to a
chronic inflammation located in the ileum and colon associ-
ated with the presence of abnormal forms of bacteria. The
chronic intoxication, they were certain, resulted from the
action of products of bacterial origin with the toxins having
a s their main target the nervous system and muscles.
                           Chapter 6



       They concluded their treatise by stating:
        Temporary relapses are very common in the course of
    this disease, even when great care is being taken to prevent
    them. The most frequent cause of such relapses is the
    attempt to encourage growth by the use of increased
    amounts of carbohydrates.
        Although Herter's conclusions failed to gain accept-
ance, his observations were so perceptive that further
researchers "stood on his shoulders" in pursuing the most
effective dietary treatment. He saw that in every case pro-
teins were very well handled, fats were handled moderately
well, while carbohydrates were badly tolerated, almost
invariably causing relapse or a return of diarrhea after a
period of improvement. He said, "It has been already men-
tioned that the carbohydrates are the obvious and fruitful
cause of derangements of digestion that are clinically deter-
minable, especially diarrhea and flatulence."
        Meanwhile, the interest shown by Drs. Holt and
Herter had been transmitted to Dr. Holt's two younger assis-
tants a t the Vanderbilt Clinic, Dr. John Howland and Dr.
Sidney V. Haas. In 1921, Howland, in his presidential
address before the American Pediatric Society, read a paper
on "Prolonged Intolerance to carbohydrate^."^ Although
Howland did not use the term celiac disease (the condition
was still known by a great variety of names) he described
his cases vividly:
       There are loose stools from time to time with loss of
   weight. The condition improves between the attacks some-
   what, but sooner or later a relapse occurs and there is a
   renewed loss of weight. The relapses are increasingly
   severe. Eventually, there is a condition of marked malnutri-
   tion in a peevish, fretful, but often precocious child. The
   abdomen is distended, at first intermittently, and then
   almost constantly. The stools are never normal. Even
   between attacks of diarrhea they are large, light gray in
   color, often frothy, and usually very foul... Growth suffers
   in proportion to the length of time that the symptoms per-
   sist, and many children are greatly below the average in
                        The Celiac Stoy                     35



    height. From clinical experience, it has been found that of
    all the elements of food, carbohydrates is the one which
    must be excluded rigorously; that with this greatly reduced,
    the protein and fat are almost always well digested even
    though the absorption of fat may not be as satisfactory as
    in health.
        Dr. Howland warned that after initial improvement
occurs with the elimination of carbohydrates, the stage
where carbohydrates are added is the most difficult. He
explained that although the initial phase may be time con-
suming, "these patients well repay the efforts expended on
them. They do not remain semi-invalids, many become vig-
orous and strong, some even with no trace of dietary idio-
syncrasies... Halfway measures are quite unavailing and
cause only loss of time." Other doctors confirmed Howland's
treatment as achieving greater success than any previous
one, but the need for some tolerable carbohydrate in the celi-
ac diet remained.
        Despite the remarkable success of Dr. Howland's
treatment with emphasis on carbohydrate restriction, other
doctors, distracted by the occurrence of fatty stools contin-
ued to believe that dietary fats were at fault. But although
there was some confusion resulting from this belief, there
was a steadily increasing recognition of the primary role of
disordered carbohydrate metabolism and digestion in caus-
ing celiac disease.
        Dr. Sidney Valentine Haas, working with Dr.
Howland, was in full agreement with Dr. Howland's work but
was interested in learning if some form of carbohydrate
could be added to the diet to hasten recovery and provide a
more varied and nutritious diet. He had noted reports
throughout the years whereby children with severe diarrhea
had done very well on banana flour (made of 70 percent ripe
banana) and plantain meal. It was at the Home for Hebrew
Infants that Dr. Haas first experimented with banana feed-
ing.7 One of his patients was an infant who had difficulty in
eating. The baby refused all food. Dr. Haas offered the baby
a banana. At that time, banana was considered completely
indigestible by a sick child. Everybody was horrified at the
36                         Chapter 6


idea of feeding it to an infant-everybody that is, except the
infant, who not only took it but asked for more. He was
given more and thus Dr. Haas discovered the banana could
be well tolerated.
        He then decided to experiment with the banana, a s
the sought-after carbohydrate source, in the dietary treat-
ment for celiac. He soon discovered that celiacs could toler-
ate this carbohydrate and, more than that, the banana could
be fed in large quantities with beneficial effect. He further
experimented with carbohydrate-containing fruits and some
vegetables and found that they, too, could be tolerated and
the celiac could regain health on a far more varied diet than
just protein and fat.
        During the next few years, Dr. Haas treated over 600
cases of celiac disease with his Specific Carbohydrate Diet
maintaining his patients on it for at least twelve months and
found that prognosis of celiac disease was excellent: "There
is complete recovery with no relapses, no deaths, no crisis,
no pulmonary involvement and no stunting of growth.ll"y
1949, Dr. Sidney Haas's reputation was known throughout
the world and on April 5th of that year, more than a hundred
leading physicians met at the New York Academy of
Medicine to pay him tribute. The New York Times reported
      Todqy, on the occasion gftheflfieth anniversary g f his
      entrance into the medical profession, one of America 's
      greatpediatricians, Dr. Sidnq I.:ffaas, is being honored
     for his pioneer work in theJield @pediatrics. Among Dr.
      ffaas's most important accomplishments was in the
      treatment of celiac disease, a dzgestive disturbance in
      which the child is intolerant gfstarchySood, and which
      was generalbfatal at the time of his ongnal work.
      Following his discovety that the carbohydrates in
      bananas could be tolerated by celiac patients, Dr. Haas
      developed an accepted routine therapy which laid the
      basis for later research and basic treatment in this
     fleld, g, lo
        In 1951, Dr. Haas, together with his son, Dr. Merrill P.
Haas, published The Management oJCeliac Disease, the most
comprehensive medical text that had ever been written on
                        The Celiac Story                   37



celiac disease." With 670 references to published reports,
the book described celiac disease more completely than had
even been done before. The Drs. Haas presented their suc-
cess with the Specific Carbohydrate Diet and offered their
hypothesis in the last chapter of their book a s to why the
diet was effective. After decades of searching, it appeared
that not only was an effective and lasting dietary treatment
found, but that the Haas Specific Carbohydrate Diet was
accepted by medical colleagues throughout the world a s a
cure for celiac disease.
        But as Michael Crichton has written, "the battle" con-
tinued. Within one year after the publication of the Drs.
Haas's book, a singular report appeared in the English med-
ical journal, Lancet.12A group of six faculty members of the
Departments of Pharmacology and of Pediatrics and Child
Health of the University of Birmingham, after testing only
ten children, decided that it was not the starch (carbohy-
drate) in the grains that so many had reported as being dele-
terious, but it was the protein, gluten, in wheat and rye flour
that was causing celiac symptoms.
        Gluten, like all proteins, it is composed of hundreds
of building blocks called amino acids which are linked
together to form the protein molecule. In most people, the
gluten molecule is broken down by digestive enzymes in the
small intestine and the simple amino acids of which gluten is
composed are absorbed by the intestinal absorptive cells to
provide nutrition for the rest of the body.l3." It is believed
that this is not the case in celiac disease and that the gluten
remains undigested.
        The Lancet report concluded:
      Gastro-intestinalfinction was investzgated in ten chil-
      dren with coeliac disease. The changes were very similar
      to those in adult idiopathic steatowhoea. The removal of
      wheatJour-om the diet resulted in rapid improvement,
      both clinicalb and biochemical&. DeterioratzonJollowed
      by reintroduction into the diet JO wheatflour or wheat
      gluten, but wheat starch had no hamfil eflect.
        They contradicted all previous work by stating that
there was no need to restrict carbohydrates and, therefore,
38                         Chapter 6


an unlimited choice of food could be ingested, provided that
wheat and rye gluten were excluded. Further, "a high caloric
diet may be given throughout with biscuits made from
cornflour, soya flour, or wheat starch instead of wheat
flour. "
         They maintained that it was not the starch in grains
that was the culprit but it was the protein gluten and that
when the gluten was "washed out" of the flour, the remain-
ing starch was perfectly fine. And overnight, the hypothesis
gained ready acceptance. No need now for doctors to worry
about adhering to a diet which eliminated specific carbohy-
drates found in many foods; only one dietary exclusion
would have to be made and that was the gluten in wheat and
rye flour. It simplified the difficult problem of keeping people
on a more restricted diet. No need to delve into food bio-
chemistry and ask why gluten-containing foods such as corn
would be permissible; it was to be a "black and white" reme-
dy with no shades of grey.
         Despite extensive research by many investigators,
there is as yet no certainty about the precise nature of the
gluten which is causing injury to the intestinal cells. During
the 19701s, as newer techniques permitted researchers to
further subdivide the large gluten molecule into smaller frac-
tions, it was found that the alpha-gliadin fraction possessed
toxic properties which appeared to injure intestinal cells of
the true celiacs.15 But there still remain unanswered ques-
tions about this smaller alpha-gliadin protein fraction: (1) is
there a genetic lack of the digestive enzymes which would
normally split these gliadin molecules into their single
amino acids thereby preventing their harmful effects? (2) Is
there a weakness in the membranes of the intestinal cells
which permits the intact, undigested gliadin molecules to
penetrate the intestinal cells and, once inside, "poison" the
cells? (3) Do the gliadin molecules bind to the surface of the
intestinal cells and, thereby, immobilize the cells and destroy
them?
         The most popular theory is that the gliadin fraction,
by penetrating the intestinal cell membrane, reaches the
underlying layer of white blood cells and causes an immune
                        The Celiac Story                   39



response. The products of the immune response, including
antibodies, injure the intestinal cells and cause them to
change their shape and to function a b n ~ r m a l l y . ~ ~
                                                          More
recent findings have implicated a carbohydrate molecule
attached to the gliadin molecule a s the toxic compound.
When the carbohydrate is removed, the gliadin molecule is
no longer injurious to the intestinal ~ e 1 l s . l ~ ~ ~
        Very recent research has cast more light on the
gluten-celiac hypothesis and highlights the interaction
between the starch and protein components of flour milled
from grains. Almost all normal people fail to absorb a large
amount of the starch of wheat f l o u r . I V h i s incomplete
absorption of starch results in an increase in intestinal fer-
mentation and the production of intestinal gas. In an effort
to discover why wheat starch is not completely digested by
many people, investigations were conducted relating to the
physical structure of wheat flour. It was found that wheat
flour is composed of granules containing a starch core sur-
rounded by a network of gluten protein. This protein-starch
complex can be separated by a manufacturing process
whereby most of the gluten is removed. The remaining flour
is sold as low-gluten flour and when it is substituted for reg-
ular wheat flour, there is improvement in starch digestion
and absorption. Surprisingly, when the low gluten flour is
baked into bread together with the separated gluten,
starch malabsorption does not occur in spite of the fact that
the same amount of gluten is present in the baked product as
was present in the whole grain before gluten extraction.
Since absorption of the wheat starch is complete, there is no
resulting fermentation and intestinal gas. This indicates that
it is not the gluten alone which results in intestinal symp-
toms.I8
        The investigators feel that it is the interaction
between the starch and the gluten which results in the
incomplete digestion and incomplete absorption of starch
and which causes intestinal gas, abdominal discomfort, and
diarrhea. They speculate that the gluten extraction process
alters or exposes the starch core thereby making the starch
more vulnerable to pancreatic digestive enzyme^.'^^^^ This
40                          Chapter 6


intriguing interaction between the starch and protein of
grains will, undoubtedly, be the basis for much future
research and may be shown to have some bearing on those
with celiac disease.
        Some patients showed remarkable clinical improve-
ment in their general well-being after following a "gluten-
free" diet. However, biopsy samples, a s viewed under the
microscope, showed intestinal cells that were still markedly
abnormal.20 Additionally, some patients who started eating
gluten suffered no ill effects at one time but became
extremely ill a t other times. Thus, not only do different celi-
ac patients vary in their response to a gluten-free diet but
the same patient may vary from time to time.21 When the all-
too-common relapse occurs, the patient is most often told
that helshe must have inadvertently ingested gluten, and it
is common for patients to become so nervous about making
a mistake that they assume that anything on a product that
begins with "glut" must be gluten: glutamic acid, glutamine,
monosodium glutamate, etc. Or that gluten had somehow
crept into the food in spite of the fact that it did not appear
on the label.
        It soon became apparent that grains which contained
proteins other than gluten were having deleterious effects on
the digestive tract. Some patients suffered relapses and
exhibited damaged intestinal cells (microscopically) upon
eating soy p r o d ~ c t s . ~ ~ "
                               Oats. ~ and barley were found to con-
tain gluten-like proteins which offended many celiac suffer-
ers." Additional reports implicated rice as being harmful to
intestinal cell^.^^,^^
        But the diet to manage celiac had been simplified and
there now remained the problem of simplifying the diagno-
sis. The new diagnostic tool, the intestinal biopsy instru-
ment, would be used to identify celiac. In spite of the
symptoms the patient manifested, the patient would not be
diagnosed a s a true celiac until other criteria are met. A
series of intestinal biopsies would be done: one tissue sam-
ple would be taken from the small intestine before gluten
was removed from the diet; a second sample would be taken
after the patient had been on a "gluten-free" diet. The
                             The Celiac Story                41



biopsy samples would have to reflect the changes in the diet:
When viewed under the microscope, the intestinal surface
would have to appear flattened or blunted while the patient
ingested gluten; after gluten withdrawal, the intestinal sur-
face would have to revert to its normal architecture of "hills
and valleys." If a patient fulfilled this established criteria,
his condition would then be given the name, "gluten-
induced enteropathy celiac disease." Thus, only a small
number of persons exhibiting the clinical symptoms of mal-
absorption including diarrhea, bloated belly, and failure-to-
thrive could now be classified as celiacs. The others, an even
larger group, suffering with the same symptoms (but who
did not pass the required test using the intestinal biopsy cri-
teria) would be suffering from diarrhea from an unknown
cause, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), malabsorption, sprue,
etc. Therefore, if a physician applied the strict definition for
diagnosing celiac disease, the number of "true" celiacs
would remain very small while there would remain a large
group of patients with assorted diagnoses or no diagnosis of
any kind.15In a recent review of celiac disease, the gastroen-
terologist writing the article referred to this method of diag-
nosis as "the current gold standard for d i a g n o ~ i s . " ~ ~
       However, this method of diagnosis has been seriously
questioned by a number of specialists. The flattened or
blunted intestinal surface has been reported in innumerable
disease states: infectious hepatitis, ulcerative colitis,
parasitic infections of the intestine including various types
of worms and one-celled parasites, kwa~hiorkor,~"oy pro-
tein intolerance, intolerance to cow's milk protein,
intractable diarrhea of infancy, Crohn's disease,2gand bacte-
rial overgrowth of the small intestine." Bacterial overgrowth
of the small intestine has also resulted in patchy broadening
and flattening of the small intestinal surface." Just about all
conditions associated with diarrhea seem to result in the
same appearance of the small intestine as is seen in the so-
called " true celiac.
                   '124s25



       And in spite of increasing numbers of sophisticated
tests developed to confirm the diagnosis of celiac including
antibody tests, genetic testing involving HLA
42                            Chapter 6



(histocompatibility antigens) markers, and twin studies,
there appear to be more exceptions to the rule than those
who "follow the rule." The reality is that thousands of
patients are suffering and have never been given a diagnosis
other than to see a psychiatrist, and thousands of patients
are following "gluten-free" diets and are getting minimal
relief, if any.
         The most disquieting development in the gluten-celi-
ac picture is the fact that celiacs, whether or not they
respond favorably or unfavorably to gluten withdrawal,
exhibit other serious intestinal problems which a gluten-free
diet does not appear to be effective in p r e ~ e n t i n g . ~      It ~ , ~ ~
seems, therefore, that something other than the protein,
gluten, is involved in the underlying cause of the disorder.
         Some investigators have always maintained that an
inability to digest disaccharides induces the sensitivity to
gluten.34 But even were the disaccharides not the underlying
cause of gluten intolerance, these double sugars should not
be included in the diet of celiacs." The flattened intestinal
absorptive cells have lost their ability to perform the last
step in digestion which is to split d i s a c c h a r i d e ~ . ~ ~
                                                                Many,~~
researchers have confirmed the fact that in celiac patients,
ability to digest disaccharides, especially lactose, is severely
limited.2g~36"-Vo   include disaccharides and certain starches
in the diet of those exhibiting a flattened intestinal surface is
to demand the impossible of these digestive and absorptive
cells and to add to the existing problems.39
         The following is part of an unsolicited letter sent to
this writer and is, unfortunately, reported all too frequently.
      After ezght years JO mysterious symptoms, dozens of
      doctors, gnrelling and oBen humiliating tests and gen-
      eral misery, no one could decide what was wrong with
      me. I discovered that because my two sisters and my
      daughter had been diagnosed as celiacs that I, too,
      shouldgo on thegluten-flee diet. Unfortunately,forboth
      my daughter, another sister and I, the gluten$-eediet
      did not work. Some symptoms were arrested but none JO
      us were thnSvingand wejust weren 'tabsorbingfood. We
      eventuallyfound the Specflc Carbohydrate Diet and it
      has been a godsend. I have never been healthier. M y
                         The Celiac Story                        43



     daughtec once a sick& (ofien whing) withdrawn child
     with thin hair and dark circles under her g e s is outgo-
     ing rev-cheeked and happy. Everyone has nohked her
     thick, shiny hail: Infact she ran a marathon thisyear
     and placed 15th out of 79 children. Last year she ran
     the same race (befare the diet) and placed 53rd, am'ved
     weepy and slept all the way home in the car.'"
     I have been on the Specfic Carbohydrate DietJor less
      than a year and shy2 have a way to go but my l ' e has
      changed drasti'cal& in this short time. Now I am active&
     pursuing my art interest-something I always had inside
      me, but didn't have the energy or drive to tackle.
        The Specific Carbohydrate Diet has been shown to
completely cure most cases of celiac disease if followed for at
least one year. It is truly a gluten-free diet, eliminating all
grains which contain gluten or gluten-like proteins while
also recognizing the limitations of the injured intestinal sur-
face. For those people who are not satisfied with their
progress on the "gluten-free" diet, the Specific Carbohydrate
Diet offers them the opportunity to become healthy.
                           Chapter 7

              THE BRAIN CONNECTION



         The search for the cause of schizophrenia and other
serious neurological disorders, going back as far a s the early
1900's, has led many investigators into the murky depths of
the gastrointestinal tract. Although far removed anatomical-
ly from the brain, the intestine continues, now as it did then,
to demand attention from the many researchers searching
for the origin of neurological disorders. Repeatedly, the med-
ical literature reports that allergists, gastrointestinal special-
ists, and psychiatrists have found that certain types of food,
impaired digestion, and faulty absorption or ingestion of
vitamins and minerals affect the function of the nervous
system including the brain.
         Celiac specialists, as early as 1908, had begun report-
ing evidence that some patients who suffered extended peri-
ods of diarrhea and malabsorption were also showing
degeneration of the brain, spinal cord, and other groups of
nervous tissue.' This deterioration of the nervous system in
celiac disease was attributed to the patients' inability to
absorb essential nutrients, including vitamins and minerals,
due to injuries to the intestinal tract accompanying the dis-
          As further advances were made in biochemistry and
cellular biology, numerous scientific papers appeared show-
ing, in great detail, the devastating effects of lack of certain
vitamins and minerals on the brain and other nerve centers
throughout the b ~ d y . ~ - j
                             Some forms of paralysis1 and types
of psychiatric disorders4 were shown to be the result of
nutrient deprivation which is known to be caused by malab-
sorption during intestinal disease. It has also been known
for almost one hundred years that microbial action in the
46                         Chapter 7


unseen world of the intestinal tract can be a source of toxins
which affect normal brain
        When our younger daughter was cured of ulcerative
colitis by dietary changes in the 1960's. the first symptoms
to disappear were a type of seizures which occurred after she
had fallen asleep. They were characterized by delirium, last-
ed about one hour and reoccurred several times weekly. Her
recovery from the intestinal disease was preceded by an end
to the seizures, never to return. During the seven years of
doing consultations with people diagnosed as having
Crohn's disease, colitis, and other forms of chronic diarrhea,
I observed that improvement for many started with a disap-
pearance of long-standing mental disorders including epilepsy,
schizophrenia, mental confusion, poor memory, and bizarre
behavior. And finally, with the distribution of my book, Food
and the Gut Reaction, letters began arriving reporting this same
phenomenon: mental disorders of long standing were clearing
up even before the intestinal symptoms disappeared.
        The medical literature abounds with published
research which has attempted to explain this brain-bowel
connection. The French scientist, Dr. H. Baruk, summarized
fifty years of research on schizophrenia and mental disor-
ders by stating:
        Instead of considering these illnesses hopeless, it is
    preferable to consider the majority of psychoses or
    neuroses as reactions to biological factors which are very
    often digestive in origin, and psychiatry must acknowledge
    them. These toxic factors are disregarded far too often.6
        Baruk, as early as 1923, implicated a harmful strain
of intestinal bacteria (E.coli, a normal inhabitant of the
intestinal tract) as producing a toxin which exerts itself on
the nervous system. This toxicity, Baruk concluded, pro-
duces a pathological sleep with delirium, resulting in psy-
chotic-type mental confusion or schizophrenia.
        About this same time period, the Drs. Buscaino of the
Neurological Clinic of the University of Naples, Italy, report-
ed that most schizophrenics showed some form of intestinal
disease whereas manic depressive patients did not. Further,
                      The Brain Connection                     47



they found that the intestinal bacterial population of schizo-
phrenics was abnormal. The Drs. Buscainos stated that:
       True schizophrenia (and not only some schizophrenic
    syndromes) appears to be the result of chronic intoxication
    from psychotoxic factors produced in the intestine.'
       More recently, in the 1970ts, a psychiatrist, Dr. F.C.
Dohan, implicated all cereal grains and milk a s being the
dietary factors in this intestinal-brain c ~ n n e c t i o n . ~
                                                               Some
investigators explained the adverse impact of these foods on
mentally disturbed people as some sort of brain allergy or
immune reaction, but there has been much controversy
among scientists in their efforts to equate the effects of these
foods with a typical allergic reaction. In 1991, Dr. J.O.
Hunter presented his opinion on this controversial subject
by writing that if this type of "food allergy" is not an
immunological disease, but a disorder of bacterial fermenta-
tion in the colon, then it might be more appropriately named
an "enterometabolic (intestinal) di~order."~
        Dr. C. Orian Truss, an internist, has focused on the
relationship of allergy and infection. With the publication of
his book, The Missing Diagnosis, he launched the concept of
Candidiasis (yeast infection) a s being at the root of many
types of mental as well as physical disorders.1° Among many
of his patients with innumerable symptoms, psychotic symp-
toms-including schizophrenia and neurosis-were often part
of the picture. Based on the premise that the intestinal flora,
yeast in particular, was in a state of imbalance (dysbiosis),
he included in his treatment and cure a diet free of carbohy-
drates. Why? Because of all dietary components, undigested
and unabsorbed carbohydrates (starch and sugar) have the
greatest influence on the growth of intestinal microbes.ll
        In the late 1970's and through the 1 9 8 0 ' ~a ~number
of reports were published in medical journals which added
fuel to the burning issue of the bowel-brain connection.
Doctors reported that among patients who had undergone
surgical shortening of the small intestine (a treatment for
serious gastrointestinal disorders as well as obesity), there-
by decreasing their ability to break down and absorb food,
48                        Chapter 7


patients were presenting with unusual neurological symp-
tom~.'~--'Among~ the symptoms were aggressiveness, sudden
disorientation, blurred vision, blunted judgment, abusive
behavior, slurred speech, staggering gait, rolling of the eye-
balls, confusion, and delirium. The attacks lasted between 36-
80 hours. Using the most sophisticated methods of analysis,
it was found that carbohydrates were not being digested or
absorbed (surgery had severely limited digestive capacity)
and intestinal bacteria were, therefore, flooded with a sur-
plus of carbohydrates which were being fermented in the
remaining intact, intestinal tract. As a result, a waste prod-
uct of bacterial fermentation, D-lactic acid, was being pro-
duced in abnormally large amounts.16It is currently thought
that this acid, along with other toxic products produced by
intestinal microbes, is entering the brain and "poisoning"
the brain cells. Although the many patients exhibiting these
symptoms have been treated with antibiotics to kill the bac-
teria producing the toxins, it has been stated that D-lactic
acid is more effectively managed by preventing its
formation, accomplished by manipulating dietary carbohy-
drates.I7 It has also been noted that this same type of malab-
sorption and the resulting production of D-lactic acid occurs
not only when there has been surgical shortening of the
intestine but in other gastrointestinal disorders as we11.18 In
addition, it is a well known fact in veterinarian medicine that
in cattle, D-lactic acidosis results from overfeeding with
grain.I2
        Since the publication of my first book in 1987,
numerous reports from individuals with both intestinal and
neurological problems have been brought to my attention.
The following are only a few case histories which show the
dramatic relationship between intestinal and brain function:
        A young woman with ulcerative colitis was reporting
her symptoms to me when her Mother interrupted to tell me
more. Apparently, the daughter was under the care of a neu-
rologist (as well as a gastroenterologist) because she barked
like a dog in her sleep. She had been taking a schizophrenic
drug for this peculiar symptom. I was curious to check on
this woman's progress with the Specific Carbohydrate Diet
                     The Brain Connection                   49



because of similar cases that had improved. When I called
the day after her next appointment with the neurologist, she
told me that her EEG (brain wave test) was normal for the
first time in years. Shortly thereafter she was taken off the
schizophrenic drug. It took longer for her ulcerative colitis to
get better-about two years.
        There have been many babies with chronic diarrhea
accompanied by epileptic seizures. One baby was on com-
mercial formula and was eating some solid foods. When his
diet was changed to the Specific Carbohydrate Diet, both
diarrhea and the epileptic seizures cleared up. He continues
to do well six years later. Another baby with seizures was
being breastfed and was also eating cereal. The Mother went
on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet, the baby was allowed only
those foods on the diet, and the epilepsy disappeared. He
has been free of seizures for five years.
        The following letter to a local newspaper further
illustrates this bowel-brain connection. The letter was writ-
ten in response to an earlier newspaper article relating to a
young woman with Crohn's disease accompanied by mental
symptoms. Upon calling the writer of this letter, other details
were given: the writer's husband had spent forty years in
and out of psychiatric institutions with the diagnosis of
schizophrenia which accompanied his intestinal disorder.
                          Chapter 7


                The Cobourg Daily Star, November 23, 1989




Diet held cure for deadly illness
       Today I read with great interest and much sadness
your article on Marilyn Isaac and the "mystery" disease
 with which she battled so long and so sadly lost.
      M y husband has suyered all his lgefiom this disease,
 but unlike most hefound he@for his illness. Like Manan
 he was treatedfor mental disease and dflerent illnessesfor
 more than 40 years. His weight by this May had golze
 below 150 pounds. He had bled internally until he was too
 weak to move around and was vomiting continually, unable
 to keepfood down. As his physical condihon declined, his
 mental attitude declined as well.
      I am an avid reader ofyour paper. Sometime in early
 May you had a column in your paper about a book written
 by Elaine Gottschall B.A., M.Sc, called Food and the Gut
 Reaction. She was in town at one o f our healthfood stores.
 I bought the book, which was available at one ofthe book
 stores. It has been a miracle-the diet is not a hard one to
follow, only requiring some extrafood preparation, but well
 worth the eyort.
      By now, afterfour months ofthe diet, my husband
 hasgained 40 pounds and is mentally well enough to drive
 his car, something he hasn't been able to do in years. He
 has been able to do all his own work and requires no he@to
 carefor me (1 have been in bedfor quite some years). I
 think, f y o u would use your article on this diet again, it
 mzght bring the worth @this diet to some other suyenng
 individual. I thankyoufor taking the time to read this letter
 and maybe he@ others.
                                                 Bet@ Elder
                           Chapter 8

               The Autism Connection



       "....in many autistic children, bacterial and
flngal overgrowths are etiologically signflcant in
 the cascade of events that result in autism or one of
 the other autism spectrum disorders. "
By Jaquelyn McCandless in Children with Starving Brains.

      "A sensible and harmlessform of w a ~ a r eon
the aberrant population of intestinal microbes is to
manipulate their energy good) supply through diet.. .
By depriving intestinal microbes of their ener-gy
source, their numbers gradually decrease along with
the products they produce. "
By Elaine Gottschall in Breaking the Vicious Cycle.

       "Janieplayed with a dollfor theJirst time ever
 today; I almostfainted. She initiated a hug and kiss
for theJirst time ever in her I 4 years of lfe. "
From Mom of Janie with Down's syndrome, autism and gastroin-
testinal issues after a short time on the Specific Carbohydrate
Diet.


         The Specific Carbohydrate Diet has entered the world
of autism through "the back door1'- the intestinal tract. And
what may have first appeared to be "the back door," via the
digestive system, is rapidly becoming one of the most scien-
tifically researched areas in determining what may be one of
the underlying causes of many autism spectrum disorders.'
Because the Specific Carbohydrate Diet's goal is to heal the
52                        Chapter 8


intestinal tract and to rid it of bacterial and fungal over-
growth, it is proving to be a very successful dietary interven-
tion in treating many autistic children and leading them back
to a life of normalcy.
        This chapter will review some of the research dealing
with the Gut-Brain Axis in child developmental disorders. It
will point out how dietary intervention with the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet addresses and often overcomes conditions
thought to be at the root of autism spectrum disorders a s
well as some cases of epilepsy and attention deficit disorder
(ADD).
        Chapter 7, The Brain Connection, highlights the
research of many years in which it had been shown that
various neurological problems originate in the digestive
system. And when the number of autistic children soared
within the last two decades, attention has again been direct-
ed to the gastrointestinal tract.
        Parents of autistic children have always known that,
among their children's symptoms, there exists symptoms of
chronic constipation, periods of diarrhea, and abdominal
pain. But until recently, the parents' reports were treated as
of no consequence. Now, fortunately, attention is being
focused on these physical symptoms a s well as on behavior,
and many gastroenterologists are in agreement that "these
children are ill and are in distress and pain, and not just
neurologically dysfunctional. " 2
        Some physicians, recognizing that diet was playing a
part in causing the intestinal symptoms, focused their atten-
tion on treating these gastrointestinal symptoms as allergies
and/or sensitivities. When testing these patients, they
found evidence of sensitivities to various food components,
mainly the gluten of grains and various components of dairy
products. The behavior of many autistic children, although
not all, showed improvement with the removal of these foods
from their diet but, unfortunately, although behavior often
improved, intestinal function did not. It was not unusual for
the author to receive letters from parents as follows:
       "My son is almost sixyears old and has autism. He was
      gluten/casein Ji-eefor two years and while, during the
                 fie Autism Connection                       53



fist six months I thought I saw improvement in his
 exhibiting less stirnmy (repeating the same action over
 and over again), his stimming returned. Even while on
 this diet, he still had constant stomach problems - being
 hospitalizedfour timesfor throwing up and dehydra-
 tion. One time he suyered with a bowel obsnucaon; the
 other times they weren't sure what brought on his
 violent vomiting attacks. No doctor even bothered to do
 a colonoscope. I have mentioned to our doctorforyears
 that he seems to be addicted to potato ch@s,,ffenchJiies,
 ketchup, and wafles. When I learned of the Speclfic
 Carbohydrate Diet, it addressed this carbohydrate addic-
 tion and I intend starting this diet promptly.
                                             "


  And another letter from Patricia :
"...Meanwhile, my younger child 3 health wasfailing,
He was on a strict gluten-pee diet because of celiac
d i s e m But it wasn't helping. He wasghost white and
rail thin, with litile energy and with chronic diarrhea
and black ciicles under his eyes. Deep down, I worried
he was dying. The team @pediatric specialists we were
seeing had no clue how to make my little boy healthy,
nor did my daughter 3 "alternative"DAN (DfleatAuasm
Now) physician. Fortunately,for us, this was August.
And every doctor treating my son was on vacation.
In desperation, I picked up a book called Breaking the
Vicious Cycle: Intestinal Health through Diet by Elaine
Gottschall, A stranger had mailed this book to me two
months earlier after meeting my Mother and heanng
about my son3 deteriorating health.
The book explained why my son wasn't thnevingon the
regular celiac diet. His intestines were so damaged he
couldn 't dzgest any grains, or complex carbohydrates.
The next day, he started the so-called Specfic
Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) described in this book. His
stools became normal, and he started growing and
gaining wezght. He 3 now a strong healthy seven-year
old.
54                          Chapter 8


      What about my daughter? She had no obvious dzges-
      tion troubles, but she did have "autism" and a recently
      discovered yeast overgrowth. One Bn'tish researcher
     found a link between the MMR shot, intestinalproblems,
      and autism. Wouldn't a diet that promised to heal her
      intestines and help with yeast overgrowth be her best
      shot at normal l'e?
      We put Mana on a dairy-@ee version of the SCD. She
      had a tern3le yeast die-oJ that lasted a week even
      though she was taking Nystatin, a popular antiJfirngal
      drug. But once she recovered@om the die-ox about a
      week late6 we were conJident she'd somedqy grow into
      an independent adult, thanks to this remarkable diet.
     Her remaining speech peculian'ties, such as mixing up
      the order fc worh in a sentence, disappeared. Her w e
      contact became normal, By the time she was 4-1/2, one
     year afier her diagnosis, no one would guess she was
      ever "autistic."
        These parents' reports are echoed throughout the autistic
community: although various dietary proteins appear to
aggravate behavioral symptoms, their removal is not
addressing the gastrointestinal problems. In addition it
becomes increasingly apparent that as a few dietary proteins
are removed, more and more must be taken out of the diet to
hopefully achieve and sustain progress until these children
have little to eat in the way of nutritious food. Parents con-
tinuously complain of their children's addiction to carbohy-
drates.
        Dr. J. 0,Hunter in 1991 described this dilemma of
treating patients with gastrointestinal symptoms a s food
allergies or sensitivities. He stated that patients who exhibit
sensitivities do not follow classical Type I allergic reaction. If
these intolerances are not allergies, then they may be a dis-
order of bacterial fermentation in the colon and the disorders
might be more appropriately named "enterometabolic (intestinal)
disorders."3
        The Specific Carbohydrate Diet approaches these
gastrointestinal challenges in autism as it has been successfully
doing for inflammatory bowel disease - as a disorder of bacterial
                     The Autism Connection                    55



fermentation and the ensuing problems which occur because
of bacterial fermentation. These problems resulting from
bacterial fermentation are:              (1) production of excess
amounts of short chain volatile fatty acids (organic acids);
(2) lowering of the pH of the blood a s these acids are
absorbed; (3) overgrowth of bacteria as the undigested car-
bohydrates provide food for bacterial proliferation; (4)
mutation of some bacteria such as E.coli because of the
change in pH in their colonic environment; and (5) excess
toxin production caused by the overgrowth of some patho-
logical bacteria.
          Bacterial fermentation occurs when undigested carbo-
hydrates escape digestion and absorption and end up in the
lower parts of the small intestine and colon. Unlike diets that
eliminate only certain proteins, based on tests showing sen-
sitivities to proteins, and that allow unlimited intake of
starches and sugars, the Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) is
designed to nourish the child optimally and to minimize bac-
terial fermentation.
          Coleman and Blass in 1985 in The journal of
Developmental Disorders reported the first evidence that
autism might be linked to carbohydrate metabolism (diges-
tion) . 4 These researchers reported that the syndrome of D-lactic
acidosis was found to be present in autistic children. Their
work was based on reports of the 1970's and 1980's show-
ing that undigested carbohydrates were being changed by bac-
terial action in the intestine to a substance, D-lactic acid.
High amounts of D-lactic acid in the bloodstream have been
found to cause bizarre behavioral symptoms. This book dis-
cusses earlier research relating to D-lactic' acidosis in Chapter
7, The Brain Connection. 5. 6 . 7. 8. 9.
          There are two approaches to treating this abnormal
production of D-lactic acid: (1) use of antibiotics to kill the
bacteria producing the substance, a method often used
medically, and (2) decreasing the amount of fermentable
carbohydrates upon which bacteria feed in order to produce
D-lactic acid. Since antibiotic therapy often is accompanied
by other side effects, it seems reasonable to suggest dietary
56                        Chapter 8



changes to accomplish the same thing or a s a support for
medical intervention with antibiotics.
         The year 2000 yielded landmark research in linking
autism to the gastrointestinal tract. It was reported that
among 385 children on the autism spectrum, significant gas-
trointestinal symptoms occurred in 46% compared with only
10% of almost 100 children without autism, confirming what
parents already knew.12
         A flurry of remarkable scientific papers appeared,
first, in the British medical journal, Lancet13 and then in The
American journal of Gastroenterology (Wakefield)I4,demon-
strating conclusively that serious intestinal pathology was
found in more than half of autistic patients. These intestinal
problems ranged from moderate to severe including esophagitis,
gastritis and enterocolitis along with the presence of lym-
phoid nodular hyperplasia. Some of these intestinal patholo-
gies resembled Crohn's disease a s well a s ulcerative colitis.
As would be expected, from previous research done on intes-
tinal problems (see pages 22-24), it was also found by
Horvath et all5, that there was low carbohydrate digestive
enzyme activity (see diagrams of injured microvilli in the
chapter on Carbohydrate Digestion), although the pancreatic
function was normal.
         Horvath's report concluded by saying unrecognized
gastrointestinal disorders, especially reflux esophagitis and
disaccharide malabsorption, may contribute to the behav-
ioral problems of the non-verbal autistic patients.
         Additional reports from findings a t Harvard
Massachusetts General Hospital conclusively showed that
carbohydrate digestion is being hampered at the locus of the
intestinal absorptive cell.16
         Initial autism research findings at Harvard
Massachusetts General, testing 400 autistic children found
that (1) lactase deficiency was found in 55% of ASD children
tested; (2) combined deficiency of disaccharidase enzymes
was found in 15%; and (3) enzyme assays correlate well
with hydrogen breath tests. (The hydrogen breath test meas-
ures the amount of hydrogen gas given off when intestinal
microbes ferment unabsorbed carbohydrates.)
                     The Autism Connection                   57



        This current work, on the decrease in the action of
disaccharidase enzymes, leading to malabsorption, forms the
basis for therapy of the Specific Carbohydrate Diet. Its goal
is to keep disaccharide ingestion to a minimum by avoiding
lactose, sucrose, maltose and isomaltose (remnants of starch
digestion) and to provide a nutritious, healing diet without
these double sugars. It deprives the microbial world of the
intestine from a surplus of fermentable carbohydrates.
        It is well known that compounds arising in the intestinal
tract can enter the bloodstream and cross the blood brain
barrier." Gastroenterologists have been aware of this in
treating the neurological effects of liver disease, hepatic
encephalopathy. Reports have been published on how these
toxins from the intestinal tract affect neurotransmitter
substances in the braiml"ther       research by E.R. Boltelg, in
an effort to correlate autism behavioral symptoms to the
intestinal tract, investigated how the toxin of one bacterium,
Clostridium tetani, could find its way from the intestinal
tract to the central nervous system via the vagus nerve.
        But there is still disagreement among researchers a s
to what constitutes the toxins from the gastrointestinal tract
and what their origins are. Again, are they derived from pro-
teins or are they products of intestinal bacterial action? This
question was addressed in an outstanding research paper
published in Neuropsychobiology in 2002 and authored by
Dr. Harumi Jyonouchi et a1.20 Dr. Jyonouchi's group were the
first to explain how bacterial toxins from the intestine can
result in sensitivities to certain dietary proteins, and casts
light on the conundrum of which comes first: allergieslsen-
sitivities which might lead to intestinal inflammation, or
bacterial and yeast overgrowth (infections) which can lead
to sensitivities to certain dietary proteins. The question can
be viewed a s "can the body's innate immune system, by
reacting to the toxins of certain bacterial cell walls, cause the
sensitivities to proteins such a s casein and gluten?" The
authors suggest that the root cause of the food protein sen-
sitivity may be an underlying sensitivity to endotoxin, which
arises from the surfaces of gram-negative bacteria in the gut
58                        Chapter 8


flora: the lipopolysaccharide component of the cell wall of
certain bacteria present in the intestines2[
        This response, to an endotoxin of intestinal bacterial
cells, is considered an innate immune response, an ancient
form of defense coded in the genes a s an inherited trait. This
innate immune response to the bacterial toxin could stimu-
late the production of antibodies and cytokines, initiators of
an inflammatory response, part of an adaptive immune
response.22 Dr. Jyonouchi's research is an attempt to answer
the question of why there is gastrointestinal pathology in
children exhibiting autism spectrum disorders and invites
the research community to explore dietary intervention in
order to ameliorate the behavioral symptoms of autism.
        It is the hope of the author that this book will be of
help to the research community in understanding how the
molecular components of commonly eaten foods affect this
problem and how changing the child's diet can, indeed,
break the vicious cycle.
                      The Autzstn Connection




Important note to parents of autistic children:
        When implementing The Specific Carbohydrate Diet, it
is important to remember that during the first week to ten
days, profound changes are occurring in the digestive tract:
the hundreds of different families of microorganisms are
changing their metabolic functions due to the lack of nutri-
ents to which they have been accustomed and of which they
are now being deprived. Some children may do well even
during the first week. But others will go through a period of
adjustment which some refer to as "detoxification." It will
be helpful during this period to find support from the many
other parents who have been through this change. Going to
the following websites can give you this support.
        It is especially important that you read the informa-
tion on these websites relating to the introduction of dairy
products. A decision can then be made if the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet should be implemented with or without
dairy.




                 The ONLY official SCD website
60                        Chapter 8


       Other websites, although not officially SCD, can be of
great support to parents who are just starting the SCD com-
mitment. Remember, advice from support groups differ and
is subjective.

       www.breakingtheviciouscycle.info is the ONLY
official website and the most authoritative source of
information.

        There is no specified schedule for introducing foods
with the exception of homemade yogurt. Some people may
appreciate suggested guidelines but they are not generally
required. The basic rules given in Chapters 9 and 1 0 are
usually sufficient: For example, fruits (other than banana)
should be peeled and cooked well. The order for introducing
them and some of the vegetables varies with each individual.
Going slowly and carefully is best determined by an individ-
ual's reactions. This the sensible approach endorsed by the
author.
        Websites which offer prepared SCD foods MUST be
used with caution. Fruit bars, candy bars, juice extracts, etc.
are rarely 100% SCD legal. Often, it is impossible to find out
what the manufacturers of these products are doing. Also,
methods and formulas can be changed without notice. It is
best to prepare all foods in the home. Hiring a responsible
person to come into your home once a week to bake and
freeze entrees and baked goods is a good option to relieve
the burden of work a t the start. Many SCD foods such a s
ketchup and mayonnaise, baked goods and treats, can be
made in a few hours and will last through the week. Larger
quantities of many items can be frozen in small individual
portions.
                          Chapter 9

              INTRODUCING THE DIET



        One basic principle of the diet must be firmly
established and persistently repeated: no food should be
ingested that contains carbohydrates other than those found
in fruits, honey, properly-prepared yoghurt, and those veg-
etables and nuts listed. While this principle may be clearly
understood, it is sometimes difficult in practice to recognize
the existence of carbohydrates in various foods. Small quan-
tities of carbohydrates other than those designated often
creep into the diet unless the strictest attention is paid to
every item of food.' Reading labels, although a good policy,
is inadequate for those on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet
since one ingredient sometimes h a s numerous names and
may not be easily recognized a s a forbidden carbohydrate.
Many cans, jars, bottles, and packages do not list all ingredi-
ents because of different labeling laws in different parts of
the country. I t i s recommended that nothing be eaten
other than those foods listed in Chapter 10, The
SpeciJc Carbohydrate Diet.
       Because fruits and raw vegetables have qualities
which tend to make them laxative, they must be used with
care when diarrhea is still active. Although all fruits, all raw
vegetables, and a s much honey a s desired may be used when
the diarrhea has cleared, it is best to eliminate them until
that time. When fruits are introduced, after a week or two,
they should be ripe, peeled, and cooked. Raw fruits should
not be introduced until diarrhea is under control. Raw veg-
etables such a s salad greens, carrots and celery sticks,
cucumbers, and onions also should not be introduced until
diarrhea is under control.
62                                Chapter 9


        Ripe, mashed banana is one of the uncooked fruits
which may be tried first. Start cautiously with about one-
quarter banana the first day. Only fully ripe bananas with no
trace of green at the tips, the skin well-speckled with brown,
and the edible portion soft enough to mash easily should be
used. Most of the carbohydrate in the unripe banana is in
the form of starch which is converted, in the process of
ripening, to monosaccharide sugars which are easily
absorbable by those with malabsorption problems.
        Most canned fruits, or fruit packed in jars, are forbid-
den because of the added sugar. If cooked fruits are desired,
they may be prepared at home with saccharin or honey.
Artificial sweeteners other than saccharin should be avoid-
ed. It is interesting to note that saccharin has been vindicat-
ed as far as bladder cancer is ~ o n c e r n e d . ~
        Low calorie diet foods often contain sorbitol or xylitol
as sweeteners. Occasionally low calorie diet chewing gum or
candy containing these sweeteners may be used. Howe.ver,
excessive use of these products can cause diarrhea and
bl~ating.~
        The Specific Carbohydrate Diet includes dairy prod-
ucts although fluid milk and some commercial products are
eliminated. A list of the many cheeses which are allowed can
be found in the Appendix along with those cheeses which
are not permitted. Homemade yoghurt, prepared according to
instructions found in the recipe section, is permitted. It is
very important that the yoghurt instructions be followed pre-
cisely so that virtually none of its lactose remains. This is par-
ticularly true for the length of fermentation; a minimum of
24 hours is required. Another dairy product which should
be included is dry curd cottage cheese.* Every effort should
be made to obtain this high-protein, sugar-free cheese for
which the dairy man in your local market should help you
find a source. It is not acceptable if it has any form of added
milk or cream. Dry curd cottage cheese is a very important
part of the diet since it may be "creamed" with homemade
yoghurt and substituted for regular cottage cheese, it may be

* NOTE: See Appendixjior sources q f d y curd cottage cheese.
                      In&roduahgthe Diet                    63



used as a base for pancakes and cheese cake, and it may be
used for short periods a s an infant formula (see Gourmet
Section).
       WARNING: Some dairies are calling a type of cottage
cheese (with added milk products) "uncreamed" since there
is very little fat (cream) in the milk which has been added.
This type of cottage cheese is not permitted. It is quite moist,
contains a considerable amount of lactose, and should
immediately be recognized as not being a dry curd.
       It is not advisable to use lactose-hydrolyzed milk
(LHM) either prepared in the home or as a commercially
available product at the beginning of the dietary regimen.
Although lactose-hydrolyzed milk decreases fermentation in
the intestine, its effect on the liver of those with chronic
intestinal disorders has yet to be investigated. Additional
research should be conducted to determine the speed with
which the sugars of LHM milk reach the liver. Only then will
it be known if the blood galactose (one of the sugars in
LHM) stays within normal levels or rises too high.3 Once the
individual makes considerable progress and is on the road to
recovery, small amounts of LHM may be used in tea, coffee
and in cooking.
       When brisk diarrhea is no longer present, egg may be
added to the diet. When bowel movements are formed and
occur no more than two or three times daily, cooked vegeta-
bles may be added to the diet cautiously, one at a time, with
a sufficient period between each new introduction to deter-
mine its effect. In some instances diarrhea recurs when veg-
etables or fruits are given, in which case their use must be
postponed. In general, squash, tomato, string beans, and
carrots, all in cooked form, are well tolerated. Canned veg-
etables, or vegetables packed in jars, are not permitted
because many have added sugar or starch which the labels
often do not indicate. Potatoes and yams are not permitted.
       Fats in association with meats, in butter, cheese, and
in homemade yoghurt are well tolerated. It is usually not
necessary to use skim or 2% milk unless one is eliminating
64                          Chapter 9


fats in order to lose weight or because of some other health
problem.
         The Specific Carbohydrate Diet is highly nutritious
and, depending on the choice of foods, is well-balanced.
Every effort should be made to "round-out" the diet by eat-
ing sensibly and not, for example, consuming large quanti-
ties of meat or more than four muffins each day to the
exclusion ofotherfoodk.
         The diet should be discussed with your physician.
Medication should continue as the physician has instructed.
As progress is made, the physician, undoubtedly, will reduce
medication gradually. WARNING: There are very specific
procedures by which certain medications are reduced and it
can be dangerous to discontinue their use improperly.
Always seek-medical advice in reducing medication.
         As is advisable for all people, a daily diet should con-
sist of a variety of foods: vegetables, fruits, cheeses, nuts,
and some animal products. However, if one desires a diet
without animal products, it is possible to eliminate them.
The many essential nutrients which one gives up when on a
strict vegetarian diet must be considered. It is beyond the
scope of this book to include lists of foods which are rich in
iron and B i z , two nutrients which are difficult to get in a
strict vegetarian diet, and it is the responsibility of those
who choose vegetarianism to see that other foods replace the
nutrients given up when one eliminates animal products.
Since soy products, including tofu, are not permitted on this
diet, it will be very difficult, but possible, for a strict vegetar-
ian to obtain sufficient nutrients and calories.
         Most people with chronic intestinal disorders also
suffer from malabsorption and, consequently, are malnour-
ished. It is advisable that they add a vitamin supplement
that specifically states that it is free of sugar, starch, and
yeast (see Appendix). It may be necessary to write to the
company manufacturing the vitamin to be sure of the ingre-
dients. Any supplement such a s bee pollen or herbs must be
carefully checked since many companies have used whey
(70% lactose), sugars, or starches a s fillers and binding sub-
stances.
                     Introduahg the Diet                   65



        In the winter, in northern climates, vitamin D should
be taken in combination with vitamin A a s cod-liver or hal-
ibut-oil (400 I.U. Vitamin D and 5000 I.U. Vitamin A). For
people who cannot tolerate the oils, even in capsule form,
there are excellent substitutes in the form of water-soluble
Vitamins A and D.
        The malabsorption of Vitamin B12 is very often a part
of chronic intestinal disorders and a special effort should be
made, often by injections by the physician, to bring B12 lev-
els up to high normal. There is some evidence that low lev-
els, although they fall within the "normal" range, are not
ideal for optimal health.
        The B-Complex vitamins: B l , B2, Niacinamide, B6,
Pantothenic Acid, Folic Acid, Biotin, and Bl2 may be taken
a s a supplement (all in one tablet). Too much Folic Acid
should be avoided; the amount taken should range from
about 0.1-0.8 mg. Folic Acid and B12 work in unison in the
cells of the body and it is important not to take more than
0.4 mg Folic Acid unless one is positive that Bl2 levels are in
the high normal range; only then may one take up to 0.8 mg.
        Any woman with a n intestinal disorder who is on the
contraceptive pill must very seriously consider vitamin sup-
plementation, especially of the B-Complex family of vita-
mins, some of which are depleted by birth control
medication.
        Since Vitamin C is readily destroyed a s a result of
cooking and exposure to air, it is advisable that at least 100
mg be taken daily. If larger amounts of Vitamin C are
currently being taken, one may continue provided that there
is no starch or sugar in the Vitamin C preparation and that
one is certain that the higher doses are not contributing to
diarrhea.
        It is the belief of the author that very large doses of
added vitamins are unnecessary; the diet is highly nutritious
and vitamin supplements are used in moderation to help in
the recovery. Added minerals may be in order but it is very
difficult to obtain satisfactory mineral supplements.
        While cells of the body require approximately twenty
different minerals, most mineral supplements contain only
66                         Chapter 9


about eight. Since minerals compete with each other for
absorption by the intestinal cells, it is possible that by taking
a few, rather than all twenty, one could upset the delicate
balance which, ideally, would be obtained from a nutritious
diet. However, since many people with intestinal disorders
are malnourished, it would be wise to check with your physi-
cian concerning the levels of the important minerals such a s
calcium, iron, iodine, and potassium. If mineral levels are
low, they may be taken for a short time until malabsorption
is corrected. Minerals, unlike vitamins, are not destroyed by
air or-temperature but can be lost in cooking water. Once
malabsorption is corrected, the superb nutrition of the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet should supply adequate minerals.
        NOTE: Maintaining proper calcium levels is extremely
important, especially in babies and growing children. The
infant formula in the Gourmet Section provides calcium but
not a s much a s is found in fluid milk or yoghurt. Therefore,
if the infant formula is used for more than two weeks, blood
calcium levels should be checked periodically by a physician
who may suggest calcium supplementation.
        It is impossible to specify the exact amount of vitamin
supplementation necessary for each individual. These for-
mulations are offered a s reasonable amounts. Please check
with your doctor.

For children:

       Vitamin A            5000 IU+ Vitamin Bi         1.5-5 mg
       Vitamin D              400 IU Vitamin B2         1.5-5 mg
        (not when getting summer sun) Niacinamide      10-20 mg
       Vitamin E            10-30 IU Pantothenic Acid     2-5 mg
                                      Vitamin B6          2-5 mg
       Vitamin C             50 mg++ Biotin         30- 100 ug+++
                                      Folic Acid      0.1-0.3mg
                                      Vitamin B 12    0.6-3.0 ug
                           Introducing the Diet


For adults:
      Vitamin A               5000 IU      Vitamin Bi        10-15 mg
      Vitamin D                400 IU      Vitamin B2        10-15 mg
           (not when getting summer sun)   Niacinamide       25-50 mg
          Vitamin E             100 IU     Pantothenic Acid 10-15 mg
                                           Vitamin B6        10-15 mg
          Vitamin C       100-500 mg       Biotin          100-200 ug
                                           Folic Acid       0.1-0.5mg
                                           Vitamin B12     100-200 ug
+   International Units
++   milligrams
+++  micrograms

        The listed values are approximations. It is sometimes
difficult to get all members of the B-Complex family in one
tablet. However, never purchase a B-Complex vitamin
with only B i , Ba, and Niacin. The minimal members of
the B-Complex family which should be included are Bi, Ba,
Niacin, Pantothenic Acid and B6. It is wise to purchase the
fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E) separately from other vita-
mins. Unless they are in separate containers, there is a ten-
dency to continue taking Vitamin D in the summer which
should not be done unless the individual is housebound or
gets very little exposure to the sun.
        In prescribing this diet it is almost more important to
stress what is not eaten than what is eaten. Any cereal
grain is strictly and absolutelyforbidden, including corn,
oats, wheat, rye, rice, millet, buckwheat, or triticale in any
form, whether a s bread, cake, toast, zweiback, crackers,
cookies, cereals, flour, or pasta (spaghetti, macaroni, or
pizza). New grain substitutes are being placed on the market
frequently. Some such a s amaranth, quinoa, and cottonseed
contain carbohydrates of unknown analysis and are not rec-
ommended while on this diet. Cereal bran, in any form, is
strictly forbidden because its indigestible fiber provides an
overload of carbohydrates which are fermented by intestinal
bacteria. In addition, most forms of cereal bran contain large
amounts of starch.' White table sugar or brown sugar is
68                         Chapter 9



forbidden a s a sweetener or in forms such a s candy, pastries,
or breads.
        The strictness of this diet cannot be overemphasized
nor should the difficulty of adhering to it be minimized.
Faithful observance requires intelligence and vigilance on
the part of those taking care of the individual or on the part
of the person who cooks for himself or herself. It is surpris-
ing how many times a child will manage, despite the best
supervision, to get hold of forbidden food. It is equally sur-
prising how many parents will decide, despite all warnings,
that "just a taste" of ice cream, cookie, or candy will do no
harm. Such infringements will seriously delay recovery and
it is unwise to undertake this regimen unless you are willing
to follow it withflnatical adherence.
        Many people have approached the dietary program by
planning to give it a one month trial. If followed carefully for
only one month, there should be changes for the better.
These improvements provide the encouragement and support
needed to commit oneself for the necessary longer period. It
is recommended that a chart be kept for this first month.
Hang it in a convenient location, preferably the kitchen.
Across the top of the sheet, list those symptoms which
describe the condition such a s gas, diarrhea, or nightmares.
Down the side of the sheet, number each line for the days of
the month. At the end of each day, fill in the chart. For
example, "four +'s" could be used to describe a lot of gas for
that day. If there is a little less the following day, "three +'s"
could be filled in. At the end of the month, progress can be
evaluated. At this point, a personal commitment can be made
to continue for a year or more, depending upon the speed of
recovery.
        If you see no improvement after a one month trial, the
diet will probably not work for you. It is your decision at this
point to return to your old pattern of eating or to continue
eating according to the outlined diet. Your decision, of
course, will depend upon your overall state of well being.
        At the beginning of the program, when symptoms
such a s diarrhea and cramping are severe, the following
basic diet should be followed for about five days. In other
                          Introducing the Diet                     69



cases, one or two days on this basic diet is sufficient. The
amounts of the specified foods to be eaten depend upon the
appetite of the individual; there is no restriction a s to quan-
tities eaten.
     Breakfast:      Dry cottage cheese (moistened with home-
                     made yoghurt) .
                     Eggs (boiled, poached, or scrambled) .*
                     Apple cider or grape juice (lh juice, Ih water).
                     (See Appendix re: juices).
                     Homemade gelatin made with juice,
                     unflavored gelatin, sweetener.
     Lunch:          Homemade chicken soup including broth,
                     chicken, pureed carrots (see page 91).
                     Broiled beef patty or broiled fish.
                     Cheese cake (see page 130) without lemon
                     rind and baked to custard consistency.
                     Homemade gelatin.
     Dinner:         Variations of above
        If a food specified in the diet is known to cause a n
anaphylactic reaction (severe allergic reaction) eliminate it
permanently from the diet. If, in the past, a n allowable food
did not agree with you, eliminate it for a short time (about
one week) and try it again in small amounts. if, after a week of
eliminating it, a food continues to cause problems, do not
include it in the diet.
        If you find it impossible to obtain the dry curd cottage
cheese, substitute the cream cheese recipe (drained home-
made yoghurt) listed in the Gourmet Section.
        When diarrhea and cramping subside, cooked fruit,
banana, and additional vegetables may be tried. If they seem
to cause additional gas or diarrhea when they are added to
the diet, delay their use until later. As the individual begins
to feel better, the rest of the diet may be introduced. Do not
use vegetables in the cabbage family until diarrhea h a s


* Avoid $diarrhea   is very severe.
70                         Chapter 9


substantially subsided. Dried legumes may be added cau-
tiously after being on the diet for about three months.
         Most cases begin to improve within three weeks after
the dietary regimen has been started and improvement usu-
ally continues. At about the second or third month, there is
sometimes a relapse even when the diet has been carefully
followed. This can occur if the person develops a respiratory
infection or for no obvious reason. Do not allow this to dis-
courage you! Once the individual gets over this, improve-
ment is usually steady with minor setbacks occurring
occasionally during the first year.
         Many cases of celiac disease, spastic colon, and diver-
ticulitis, appear to be cured by the end of a year. Other disor-
ders such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis take much
longer with the minimum time of two years on the diet. A
rule of thumb is to stay on the diet for at least one year after
the last symptom has disappeared.
         At that time, introduce one forbidden food at a time.
it is advisable to add only one food per week, starting with
very small amounts and increasing the amount as the week
progresses. The next week, another food may be added. If
these foods appear to be well tolerated, one may decide to
return to a regular diet. If symptoms recur upon the intro-
duction of a forbidden food, it is best to remain on the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet longer.
         It is hoped that no one who recovers from his or her
problem by following the Specific Carbohydrate Diet ever
returns to a diet high in refined sugar and refined flours.
These are lacking or low in nutrients, will not nourish the
immunological system adequately, and can make the
individual more susceptible to intestinal infections. We kept
our child on the diet for seven years although the symptoms
had disappeared at the end of two. We enjoyed this way of
eating and preferred to be cautious. Since Dr.Haas had died
two years after the diet was initiated, we had no way of
knowing the right time to go off the diet and, realizing how
highly nutritious the diet was, we decided not to risk going
off it too soon.
                     Introducing the Diet




       Websites, although not officially SCD, can be of great
support to people who are just starting the SCD commitment.
Remember, advice from support groups differ and is
subjective.

        www.breakingtheviciouscycle.info is the ONLY
official website and the most authoritative source of
information.

        There is no specified schedule for introducing foods
with the exception of homemade yogurt. Some people may
appreciate suggested guidelines but they are not generally
required. The basic rules given in Chapters 9 and 10 are
usually sufficient: For example, fruits (other than banana)
should be peeled and cooked well. The order for introducing
them and some of the vegetables varies with each individual.
Going slowly and carefully is best determined by an individ-
ual's reactions. This the sensible approach endorsed by the
author.
       Websites which offer prepared SCD foods MUST be
used with caution. Fruit bars, candy bars, juice extracts, etc.
are rarely 100% SCD legal. Often, it is impossible to find out
what the manufacturers of these products are doing. Also,
methods and formulas can be changed without notice. It is
best to prepare all foods in the home. Hiring a responsible
person to come into your home once a week to bake and
freeze entrees and baked goods is a good option to relieve
the burden of work at the start. Many SCD foods such a s
ketchup and mayonnaise, baked goods and treats, can be
made in a few hours and will last through the week. Larger
quantities of many items can be frozen in small individual
portions.
                         Chapter 10

   THE SPECIFIC CARBOHYDRATE DIET TM



ALLOWABLE PROTEINS (Meat, fish, dairy products, etc.)
      All fresh or frozen beef, lamb, pork, poultry, fish
(including shellfish), eggs, natural cheeses (listed in
Appendix), homemade yoghurt made according to recipe in
Gourmet Section, DRY CURD cottage cheese. Canned fish
(canned in oil or water).
   NOT PERMITTED
   Processed meats such as hot dogs, bologna, turkey loaf,
   spiced ham, breaded fish, canned fish with sauces,
   processed cheeses (listed in Appendix), smoked meats
   (unless you know definitely that sugar has not been added
   at some stage in the smoking process). Most available
   smoked meats contain considerable amounts of refined
   sugar. In many parts of the country, abattoirs are available
   that will smoke meats according to your specifications.
   However, for those people who cannot get their meat
   smoked without sugar, ordinary smoked bacon may be
   eaten once a week if it is fried very crisply.
          Most processed meats are not permitted since they
   contain starch, whey powder, lactose, or sucrose. It may be
   possible to obtain hot dogs and other processed meats
   without these additives and, if so, they may be included in
   the diet. NO CANNED MEATS PERMITTED.
ALLOWABLE VEGETABLES - Fresh or frozen (with no added
sugar or starch). NO CANNED VEGETABLES, OR VEGETABLES
PACKED IN JARS, ARE PERMITTED.
       Artichoke (French but not Jerusalem), asparagus,
beets, dried white (navy) beans, lentils, and split peas (dried
legumes prepared according to instructions in Gourmet
74                         Chapter 10


Section), broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower,
carrots, celery, cucumbers, eggplant, garlic, kale, lettuce of
all kinds, lima beans (dried and fresh), mushrooms, onions,
parsley, peas, peppers (green, yellow and red), pumpkin,
spinach, squash (summer and winter), string beans, toma-
toes, turnips (may be tried after considerable improvement),
watercress.
       Snacks can include raw vegetables provided that
diarrhea is not active.

     NOT PERMITTED
   Grains such as wheat, barley, corn, y e , oats, nee, buck-
   wheat, millet, triticale, buulgu spell. (No cereals, bread, or
  B u r madeporn these).
     Potatoes (white or sweet), yams, parsnips, okra, chick
     peas, bean sprouts, soybeans, mungbeans, fava beans,
     garbanzo beans, turnips (may be tried after considerable
     improvement).
     Amaranth flour, quinoa flour, or any newly-introduced
     grain substitutes such as cottonseed.
     Wheat germ. Seaweeds.
     Caution: Many recipes from other countries, such as cous-
     cous, contain grain-like ingredients which must be avoided.
ALLOWABLE FRUITS - Fresh, raw or cooked, frozen (with no
added sugar), and dried. Canned fruits, or fruits packed in jars,
which state "packed in own juice"; none canned in any other
kind of juice. In sweetening cooked or raw fruits, use honey or
saccharin. No other artificial sweetener but saccharin is
allowed.
       Apples, avocadoes, apricots, bananas (ripe with black
spots beginning to appear on skin), berries of all kinds
(including blueberries), cherries, fresh coconut or unsweet-
ened shredded coconut, dates (only loose California dates
are permitted; dates which stick together in a mass have had
syrup or sugar added and are not permitted), grapefruit,
grapes, Kiwi fruit, kumquats, lemons, limes, mangoes,
melons, nectarines, oranges, papayas, peaches, pears,
pineapples (glazed pineapple is permitted only if the glaze is
               The Spec@ Carbohydrate Diet TM               75


the result of the drying of the natural sugars in the pineap-
ple), prunes, raisins (preferably dark), rhubarb. tangerines.
        Some people are allergic to sulfites and should avoid
dried fruit to which these have been added. If there is no
sensitivity to sulfites, this type of dried fruit may be used
occasionally.
        Dried banana chips are usually coated with corn
syrup or refined sugar and should be avoided unless they
are known to be produced without such additives.
ALLOWABLE NUTS - Purchased with or without shells.
       Almonds, pecans, Brazil nuts, filberts (hazelnuts),
walnuts, unroasted cashews, boiled chestnuts. Peanut but-
ter, without additives of any kind. Roasted peanuts in the
shell may be tried cautiously after being on the diet about
six months when diarrhea is gone. Avoid shelled peanuts a s
most have added starch. Nuts sold in salted mixtures are not
permissable since most have been roasted with a starch
coating.
NOTE: Finely ground up nuts will be referred to as nut flour in
the recipes. Use nuts ONLY a s nut flour until diarrhea has
cleared up. Then, nuts may be used as a snack and should be
chewed well.
ALLOWABLE BEVERAGES (See Appendix)
JUICES
        Canned tomato juice is permissible (only salt added).
V-8 is not permitted because it contains added tomato paste,
which is not allowed.
        Use tomato juice for cooking instead of canned
tomato paste, canned tomato sauce, or canned tomato puree.
Avoid canned tomato juice mixtures such a s tomato juice
cocktail or other tomato juice mixtures.
        Orange or grapefruit juice, freshly squeezed or juices,
if available, not made from concentrate. All of these without
added sugar. While diarrhea is active, AVOID ORANGE JUICE
IN THE MORNING. If taken in the morning, it tends to
76                        Chapter 10


increase diarrhea. However, it appears to be well tolerated
later in the day.
        Grape juice, white or dark. Bottled grape juice usually
has no added sugar; avoid frozen grape juice which usually
does have added sugar.
        Pineapple juice (canned, frozen, or fresh) without
added sugar.
        Apple juice, formerly an allowable beverage, has
become a problem because some manufacturers are adding
corn syrup and sugar which is not listed on the label.
Therefore, choose an apple cider packed by a local company
you feel is responsible. You can call or write to them to
ensure that it is pure apple cider without added sweetener. A
preservative such a s sodium benzoate is permissible. It is
still possible in many areas to obtain freshly pressed apple
cider and freeze enough for a year (Caution: fill containers
only two-thirds full).
        Juices packed in boxes, even those which state that
there has been no sugar added, should be avoided since
experience has shown that they are not well tolerated by
those on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet.
        Freshly squeezed vegetable juices of any of the
allowed vegetables.

OTHER BEVERAGES
       Weak tea or very weak coffee, perked or dripped,
without milk or cream.
       Some herb teas can be laxative. Restrict the use of
herb teas to peppermint and spearmint.
       Milkshakes made with homemade yoghurt, fruits,
sweetened to taste with honey or saccharin.
     NOT PERMITTED
     Fluid milk of any kind.
     Dried milk solids.
     Commercially prepared acidophilus milk which contains
     unfermented milk along with the acidophilus bacteria;
     much lactose remains.
     Commercial buttermilk, commercial sour cream, or com-
     mercial yoghurt (except for use as a starter for your own
                fie SpenJic Carbohydrate Diet TM                77



   homemade yoghurt). Some companies are producing sour
   cream which contains virtually no lactose. Inquire concern-
   ing the availability of this permissible product in your area.
   Enzyme-treated milk, except a s noted in Chapter 9; milk
   drunk along with lactase enzyme replacement (in vivo
   replacement).
   Soybean milk.
   Instant tea or coffee.
   Coffee substitutes; most have malt added which is not permitted.
   Postum.
ALLOWABLE CONFECTIONS
     A person on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet does not
have to be denied sweets and other confections. With the use
of honey, nuts, dried fruits, the most delicious cakes, cook-
ies, muffins, and candies may be made.

ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS
        Although grains are not permitted, salad and cooking
oils made from grains may be used; therefore, corn and
soybean oils are permitted. Other oils which may be used for
salads and cooking are sunflower and safflower oils. Olive
oil is highly recommended.
        Thicken gravy with boiled onion pureed in blender or
with homemade mayonnaise (see Gourmet Section for
gravy .
        Unflavored gelatin is to be used for gelatin-type
desserts.
        Mustard is permissible; use plain mustard since
gourmet types have many added ingredients which must be
avoided.
        Dill pickles and olives are permissible. Read labels
carefully and avoid those with added sugar.
        Vinegar is permitted (cider, white, or wine). Some
gourmet-type vinegars have added sugar and should not be
used.
        Diet soft drinks are permitted occasionally. Those
sweetened with aspartame or Nutri-Sweet may sometimes
contain lactose and should be avoided, if possible. However,
if this is the only type available, one per week is permitted.
78                      Chapter 2 0



Diet soft drinks sweetened with saccharin need not be limit-
ed to only one a week: 2-3 weekly would be permissible.
        DO NOT USE DIET SOFT DRINKS SWEETENED WITH
ANY OTHER SWEETENER-some can aggravate intestinal
problems to a great extent. Bottled water without any addi-
tive is permissible but those which have been marketed a s
"sport drinks," or have added fiber, vitamins, or minerals
should be avoided. Soft drinks sweetened with FRUCTOSE
and/or GLUCOSE should not be used (see next page).
        Use butter, not margarine. Margarine contains added
milk solids and/or whey. Cultured butter, if available, is
highly recommended.
        Spices of all kinds may be used. Avoid mixtures such
a s "apple pie spices" and curry powder; buy spices such as
cinnamon and nutmeg separately.
        Use fresh garlic and onions instead of garlic and
onion powders which may have a starch base.
        Coconut milk and almond milk may be tried after
three months, if homemade. (See Gourmet Section).
CAUTION: If eating baked goods with almonds, consumption
of almond milk should not exceed 8 oz (250 mL) daily.
        Pasta such a s spaghetti and macaroni is made from
grains and is forbidden. There are substitutes for pizza and
spaghetti in the Gourmet Section.
        Do not use cornstarch, arrowroot starch, tapioca
starch, sago starch, or other starches of any kind.
        Do not use chocolate or carob.
        Do not use bouillon cubes or instant soup bases.
        DO NOT USE PRODUCTS MADE WITH REFINED
SUGAR. This eliminates many commercially prepared prod-
ucts, some of which are listed in the Appendix.
        Do not use agar-agar or carrageenan.
        Do not use pectin in making jellies and jams (see
recipes for jams in Gourmet Section).
        Ketchup is almost 40% sugar and is not permissible.
(see Gourmet Section for a quick ketchup).
        No ice cream unless you make your own. Commercial
ice cream is very high in lactose and sucrose. Even those
                m e Speciic CarbohydrateDiet TM              79



commercial ice creams made with honey are often high in
lactose.
         No molasses, corn syrup, or maple syrup.
HONEY - This is the sweetener of choice. Although many
health claims are made for various enzymes, pollen and other
substances to be in the honey, it is preferred that, when on this
diet, you use a honey which is fairly clear when held up to
light. A slightly cloudy appearance is all right. Pasteurized
honey from a store, as well as honey bought from a beekeeper,
is fine.
         Do not use flours made from beans or lentils since
beans and lentils were probably not soaked prior to grinding
and in the dried form, they have too high a concentration of
starch. Soaked and cooked navy beans (see instructions in
Gourmet Section) may be drained and pureed and used in
some of the cake recipes a s an "extender" in order to cut
back on the quantity of nut flour required.
         Do not use baking powder. Use baking soda where
specified.
         Do not use seeds of any kind until three months after
the last symptom has disappeared and then try them cautiously.
         Although all natural cheeses may be used (see
Appendix), there are two cheeses which are considered nat-
ural which must be avoided. They are Ricotta and
Mozzarella. The brown, caramelized cheese called Gjetost
must also be avoided.
         Many medications have added carbohydrates of the
wrong kind (sucrose, lactose and starch). Some of these
medications may be obtained without these sugars by asking
your pharmacist. The pharmacist may substitute and replace
these with either fructose or dextrose. He may suggest the
same drug but a brand made without lactose and sucrose.
However, if the medication is only available with these
added carbohydrates, use the medication when essential.
         However, for your own consumption and food prepa-
ration, DO NOT USE FRUCTOSE OR GLUCOSE SYRUP NOR
POWDERED OR GRANULATED FRUCTOSE, GLUCOSE OR
DEXTROSE. Although they sound a s though they are mono-
saccharide sugars, in recent years companies are selling
80                        Chapter 10


them as a mixture of assorted sugars and still retaining the
labeling of the single monosaccharide sugars. In other
words, they are being mislabeled.
       Do not use any product which contains FOS
Ifiuctooligosacchan'des). Thisform of starch (inulin)
mayfeed ha@l bacteria as well as 'flendly" bacte-
n'a and will defeat the beneJts of the diet,
       rfyou are using preparations containing m e n d -
ly" bacten'a (which often contain other ingredients), it
is better to use products that contain lactose (or
whey) than FoS.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
       Avoid beer.
       Very dry wine is permissible. if a sweeter wine is
desired, add a crushed saccharin tablet or sweeten with
honey.
       Occasionally gin, rye, Scotch, bourbon, vodka, etc. No
sherry, cordials, liqueurs, or brandy.
       Club soda is permissible a s a mixer since it has no
added sugar.
       The following is a sample day's menu. The quantity
of foods eaten should depend upon appetite. It is presented
to give an idea of how the Specific Carbohydrate Diet can be
implemented.

                          BREAKFAST
     Baked apple sweetened with honey, if desired; cinnamon to
     flavor
     Scrambled eggs
     Homemade nut muffin with butter and homemade jam
     Weak tea, coffee, grape juice, or apple cider

                             LUNCH
     Tuna fish salad made with homemade mayonnaise,
     garnished with olives, dill pickle, on a bed of lettuce
     Slices of cheddar cheese
            fie SpenLfic CarbohydrateDiet TM             81



Homemade pumpkin pie (recipe in Gourmet Section) Nut
crust can be used or the filling can be eaten a s a pudding
Pina Colada made according to recipe in Gourmet Section

                         DINNER
Homemade spaghetti sauce made with ground beef,
onions, garlic, herbs, tomato juice. Serve on a bed of boiled
beans or spaghetti squash
Freshly grated cabbage salad with homemade mayonnaise
or oil and vinegar
Peas and carrots with butter
Fresh fruit or cheese cake (recipe in Gourmet Section)
Tea
                GOURMET SECTION

                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
APPETIZERS, DIPS, AND SPREADS
   Apple-Raisin Peanut Butter Spread   87
   Liver Pate                          87
   Party Cheese Dip                    88
SOUPS
   Carrot                              89
   Cream of Tomato                     90
   Gazpacho                            90
   Hearty Vegetable                    91
   Chicken Soup                        91
   Roasted Eggplant                    92
CONDIMENTS, SALADS, AND SALAD DRESSINGS
CONDIMENTS
   Chili Sauce                         93
   Honey-Ginger Chutney                94
   Ketchup                             94
   Pineapple Cilantro Salsa            95
   Raw Cranberry Relish                95
SALADS
   Cottage Cheese Salad                96
   Halloween Carrot                    96
   Mock Antipasto                      97
   Seafood                             97
   Summer Fruit Terrine                98
   Waldorf                             99
   Zucchini and Tomato                 99
SALAD DRESSINGS
   Mayonnaise                          100
   Vinaigrette                         101
   Yoghurt Dressing                    101
84                      Gourmet Section


VEGETABLES
   Baked Acorn Squash                                102
   Butternut Squash Slices                           102
   Carrot Curls                                      103
   Cauliflower "Potatoes"                            103
   sweet and Sour Lentils                            104
MAIN DISHES, POULTRY STUFFING, GRAVY
   ~ a k e dBean Casserole                           105
   Baked Cottage Cheese                              106
   chicken Royale                                    106
   Chicken Croquettes                                107
   Poultry Stuffing                                  108
   Ginger-Yoghurt Chicken                            108
   Gravy                                             109
   Honey-Garlic Chicken Wings                        110
   Honey-Garlic spareribs                            110
   Fish Casserole                                    111
   Pizza #I                                          112
   John's Pizza #2                                   113
   "Spaghetti" and Sauce                             114
   Zucchini Noodles                                  115
   Stuffed Zucchini                                  116
   Zucchini Casserole                                117
   Zucchini Lasagne                                  118
   Stir-Fried Vegetables with Chicken, Beef, or Pork 119
   Vegetable Meat Loaf                               120
MUFFINS, BREADS, AND PANCAKES
   Basic Muffin and Bread Recipe                     121
   Cheese Bread                                      124
   Banana Pancakes                                   124
   Deanna's Pancakes with a 'ltvist                  124
   Deanna's (Midas Gold) PancakesIWaffles            124
   Herb's Bean Pancakes                              126
   Lois Lang's Luscious Bread                        127
   Zucchini Muffins                                  128
   Sandwich Rolls                                    128
FROSTINGS AND TOPPINGS
   Cream Cheese Frosting                             136
   Honey Frosting                                    136
   Honey Cream Whipped Topping                       136
CAKES
   Banana
   Carrot
   Cheese
   Date Loaf
   Nut Torte
COOKIES
   Almond-Honey Crisps
   Cheese
   Date-Filled
   Peanut Butter Brownies
   Peanut Butter
   Monster
   Pumpkin
DESSERTS
  Apple Custard Pie
   Applesassies
   Baked Honey Apple Slices
   Custard
   Honey-Glazed Whole Apples
   Honey-Walnut Baked Apples
   Ice Cream
   Instant Blender Ice Cream
   White Bean Ice Cream
   Pineapple Cheese Dessert
   Lemon Souffle
   Raspberry Mousse
   Raspberry Mousse Angel Pie
   Orange Mousse
   Pumpkin Pie
SWEET TREATS, JAM
   Candied Nuts
   Granola Chews
   Quick, Uncooked Coconut Ball Candy
   Vanilla Candy
   Lolly Pops
   Becky's Magic Toffee
   Jams
                          GounnetSection


BEVERAGES
   Almond Milk                             155
   A4ilk Shakes                            155
   Fruit Juice Spritzer                    155
   Party Punch                             156
   Pina Colada                             156
MILK PREPARATIONS AND INFANT FORMULA
   Yoghurt                                 157
   Cream Cheese                            160
   French Cream                            160
   Infant Formula - Disaccharide-Free      161
       APPETIZERS, DIPS, AND SPREADS

            Apple-Raisin Peanut Butter Spread
This spread may be used on slices of cheddar cheese or as a dip.
  ?hcup peanut buffer                ?hcup raisins
      (no additives)                 '/z teaspoon ground
  '/z cup unpeeled, diced               cinnamon
      apple
In a small bowl sir together peanut butter, apple, raisins and
cinnamon.
If too stiff to spread, add a little apple cider and blend ingredients
together.


                            Liver Pate
  1 Ib. tender liver         1 small onion, cut into
      (chicken or cafl          small pieces
  %-I/z CUP homemade         salt and pepper to taste
     mayonnaise fseepg. 100)
Pan fry liver in butter until it has lost its pink color.
Cool liver and cut into small pieces.
Place liver, onion, and mayonnaise in blender or food processor.
(If using blender, place mayonnaise at bottom so that blades will
turn easily.)
Blend until smooth.
Serve as a stuffing for celery, on lettuce leaves, or as a dip with
raw vegetables.
Can be spread on squares of cheese and served as an appetizer.
                       Gourmet Section



                     Party Cheese Dip
  1% cups cheddar cheese,        -% cup apple cider or dry
    grated                         white wine
  ?4 cup SOJ? buffer            Jiuits such as apple or
  % teaspoon a3y mustard           pear w e e e s or raw
    PO wder                        vegetables
Cream the butter; blend in mustard powder and cider.
Add the grated cheese and blend thoroughly.
Chill overnight, if possible, to blend flavors.
Allow to stand at room temperature for lh - 1 hour.
Use with fruits or vegetables.
                           SOUPS

                         Carrot Soup
  2 a7s. m t s , d b e d and      2 small cloves garlic,
     e-
  4 cups homemade chicken
                                     mushed
                                  1 cup homemadeyoghurt
     stock                        % cup chopped almonds
  1W ? ! & - d h                  3-4 tablespoons butter
Salt chicken stock to taste
Parboil carrots in chicken stock about 12-15 minutes. Cool.
Saute the onion, garlic, chopped almonds in 3-4 tablespoons but-
ter until tender but not browned.
Puree carrots, stock, sauteed mixture, and yoghurt in a blender
until smooth.
Add seasoning of your choicet.
Heat very slowly in a double boiler or chill and serve cold.
Garnish with toasted nuts, parsley or cress.

tsuggested seasoning combinations from which to choose:
1. Pinch nutmeg, 'h teaspoon mint, dash of cinnamon, OR
2. Ih- 1 teaspoon thyme, l/2-1 teaspoon marjoram, Ih - 1 teaspoon
basil, OR
3. 1 teaspoon freshly grated ginger root sauteed in butter.
                        Gourmet Section


                   Cream of Tomato Soup
  2 cups tomatojuice               honey or saccharin to
  %-I cup homemade                   taste
   yoghurt (see pg. 157)
Make a paste with the yoghurt and '14 cup tomato juice.
Slowly stir in the remaining juice.
Heat over low heat or in a double boiler, stirring occasionally.
Season to taste with salt, pepper, sweetener, and herbs of choice.


                       Gazpacho Soup
  4 cups tomatojuice        juice o f 1 lime (optional)
  1 small well-minced onion 2 tablespoons white
  2 cups dicedpesh              vinegar
     tomatoes                1 teaspoon tan-agon
  1 cup minced green pepper     (optional)
  1 cup diced medium         1 teaspoon basil
     cucumber(peeled)        ?hcuppeshly chopped
  1 clove garlic, mshed         parsley
 juice of% lemon             2 tablespoons olive oil
                             salt and pepper to taste
Garnish: 1 hard boiled egg yolk chopped with a little parsley
(optional).
Combine all ingredients.
Chill for at least two hours before serving.
Note: Ingredients may be processed in a blender instead of
chopping separately.
                   Hearty Vegetable Soup
  I cup chopped celery             4 cups water and about I
  I cup chopped cawots                lb. be@ bones
  I cup chopped onion                 (or %-IZb. beeJ
  % cup chopped cabbage            2-oilor-
  2 cups tomatojuice or a          Season to taste (herbs
    JaYJesh tomatoes                 and spices such as
  2 cups homemade chicken            basil, salt, pepper; bay
     or begfstock OR                 ZeaJ

If a food processor is available, all vegetables may be chopped in
a few minutes using the steel blade.
Saute onions and carrots in oil or butter until soft.
Add all other ingredients and simmer for 2 hours if stock is used;
for 3-4 hours if beef bones or beef is used.


                        Chicken Soup
Using the largest pot you have, fill half of it with chicken parts
(legs and thighs make the most flavorful soup).
Peel about ten carrots and add to chicken.
Add about two large onions, a few stalks of celery, and some
parsley.
Season with salt.
Fill pot with water.
Simmer for about 4 hours and then strain soup through a colan-
der or strainer.
Skim off top layer of fat (don't worry if you can't get it all).
Puree carrots in blender and return to broth.
Remove skin from chicken parts and return to broth.
Onions, celery, and parsley should not be used at the start of the
dietary regimen because the fibrous parts of these vegetables
may cause problems.
                         Gourmet Section


                   Roasted Eggplant Soup
This soup is a real gourmet treat.
  2 medium emlants                   4 clovesJesh garlic, minced
  r medium onion, sliced             2 cups homemadeyoghurt
  2 stalks celeu, roughly            2 quarts chicken or
     chopped                              shrimp stock
  1 medium cawot, roughly            3 tablespoons butter
     chopped                         74 cupflesh basil
  r tablespoon olive oil             salt and pepper to taste
Slice eggplants lengthwise and rub with olive oil.
Place into a preheated oven (400°F, 200°C) until soft and golden
brown.
In a large pot, combine onion, carrot, celery, garlic and stock and
bring to a boil,
Reduce temperature and simmer until vegetables are tender.
Peel eggplant and cut into cubes.
Strain vegetables and return stock to pot.
Combine strained vegetables with cubed eggplant and puree in
blender or food processor.
Add yoghurt and butter to pureed vegetables and blend again in
blender or processor.
Add vegetable and yoghurt mixture to stock.
Heat gently to simmer stage.
Season with salt and pepper to taste and serve piping hot gar-
nished with chopped basil.
(Recipe courtesy of David J. Couture)
(Submitted by Barbara Scheuer)
               CONDIMENTS, SALADS,
               AND SALAD DRESSINGS

                          CONDIMENTS
                           Chili Sauce
  I - 6 qt. basket n'pe              2 cups green peppers,
     tomatoes, unpeeled,                chopped
     chopped                         2% cups vinegar
  6 cups celev, chopped              I tablespoon salt
  4 cups onions, chopped             3 cups honey
                                     dash of pepper
All ingredients may be chopped very quickly in a food processor.
Combine all ingredients.
Bring to a boil in a large pot, stirring more often as the chili sauce
thickens. STIR FREQUENTLY to prevent scorching.
Simmer for about 30 minutes depending upon thickness desired.
Cool. Pack in plastic containers and freeze OR bottle and seal.
                        Goumzet Section


                   Honey-Ginger Chutney
  2 % CUPS honey                  1% cups canned crushed
  2 cup cider vinegar                unsweetened pineapple,
  6 or 7 cooking apples              includingjuice
  2 lemons                        2 cup raisins
  2 green peppers or sweet        4 teaspoom~esh    ginger,
     red peppers                    grated
  3 medium onions                 74 cup almonds, slivered


Heat the honey and vinegar in a large saucepan,
Peel, core, and dice apples finely.
Add apples to the honey and vinegar and simmer for 20 minutes.
Remove the seeds and chop peppers and lemons finely, prefer-
ably in a food processor using the metal blade, and add to apple
mixture.
Stir in the finely chopped onions.
Add the pineapple, raisins and ginger.
Simmer for 20 minutes more.
Add the slivered almonds and simmer for 30 minutes, stirring
frequently to prevent sticking.



                           Ketchup
  2 cups tomatojuice
  2 -3tablespoons white vinegar
  honey and/or saccharin to taste
  bay leaf (optional)
  salt and pepper to taste
Mix all ingredients except sweetener and simmer on stove until
thick, stirring often to prevent sticking.
When almost the desired thickness, add sweetener to taste and
complete cooking.
Ladle into sterilized jars and seal immediately OR place in small
containers and freeze.
                  Pineapple Cilantro Salsa
This recipe is a creation of Linda Hanson, CEO of Frisee, "Caterer
of the Stars".
  1 small, ripe pineapple          % red bell pepper
  I small red onion                salt and pepper to taste
  2 bunches of cilantro

Peel and core pineapple.
Finely chop all ingredients starting with the pineapple.
Combine the finely chopped pineapple with one half of the red
pepper and one half of the red onion.
Season with salt and pepper to taste and then add the fresh
cilantro leaves that have been washed and finely chopped.
Depending on taste, add some of the remaining chopped onion
and red pepper.
This salsa is especially delicious served with grilled chicken
breasts, grilled white fish or salmon,
Fresh mango or papaya can also be chopped and added.
Some of the cilantro can be replaced with fresh mint leaves which
have been finely chopped.


                   Raw Cranberry Relish
  1 lb._fi.eshcranbenies           1 apple
  1 orange                         honey
Wash and drain cranberries.
Cut orange into small pieces and remove seeds (orange need not
be peeled).
Core apple and cut into small pieces.
Combine ingredients and process using blender, processor, or
hand grinder until well mixed.
Sweeten to taste with honey.
Serve with meat or poultry or mix with dry curd uncreamed cot-
tage cheese and serve on lettuce.
                        Goumet Secton


                           SALADS
                    Cottage Cheese Salad
  1 cup uncreamed cottage          '/s cup unsweetened
      cheese fdty white              pineapple flesh or
      curd)                          canned) or otherJiuit
  '/s cup homemade yoghurt           in season
Mix ingredients together and serve on lettuce.


       Halloween Carrot Salad (Pumpkin Heads)
  2 cups grated raw carrots
  I/z CUP homemade mayonnaise
  lettuce leaves
Garnish: a few dark raisins and strips of green pepper
Mix carrots with mayonnaise.
Fill a small cup with carrot salad and unmold onto a lettuce-cov-
ered plate.
Make eyes and nose of pumpkin head using raisins.
Use strip of green pepper for mouth.
                    Mock Antipasto Salad

  2 can anchovies                lettuce, shredded
  2 or 2 hard boiled eg;gs,      Italian herbs (oregano,
    quartered                       basil), desired
  2Ji-esh tomatoes, diced or     Oil and vinegar dressing
    sliced
Mix all ingredients and chill.




                         Seafood Salad
  I can tuna, salmon, or         I/z cup homemade
     crabmeat or 2 lb.              mayonnaise
     cooked and chilled          lettuce leaves
     blandcfsh (sole,
     halibut, cod, etc.)
Drain oil or water from canned fish.
Flake fish with a fork.
Add as much mayonnaise as desired, mix thoroughly, and chill.
Heap onto a bed of lettuce.
                         Goutmet Section


                    Summer Fruit Terrine
  2 cups apple cider
  2 envelopes unflavored gelatin
  % CUP honey
  h teaspoon vanilla (optional)
  !
  HeshJiuit:
    3 or 4 dwerent kinds such as strawbewies,
    raspbern'es, cantaloupe, honeydew melon, orange
    sections.
A standard-sized bread loaf pan is suitable for this recipe.
Apple cider, which is usually easier to buy in the Fall of the year
depending upon where you live, can be frozen and then used
during the summer months when fresh fruit is available.
In the top of a double boiler, heat the apple cider and honey.
Place gelatin in ?hcup cold water for a few minutes to soften.
When the cider is hot, add softened gelatin and mix thoroughly.
The amount of fruit used should be determined by the size of the
pan.
Place a layer of fruit in the bottom of the pan and cover with
cider.
Refrigerate until firmly set.
Place another layer of fruit on top of first layer and cover with
cooled cider. Refrigerate until second layer sets.
Repeat this process until loaf pan is full.
The gelatin layer between fruit layers should be at least 1/4"- lk"
thick.
Refrigerate overnight.
To remove, rub pan with a hot cloth on bottom and sides and
invert on a serving dish.
(Recipe courtesy of David J. Couture)
(Submitted by Barbara Scheuer)
                             Recipes


                        Waldorf Salad
  3 cups apples, cut in             I stalk celeiy, chopped
     chunks or l/z inch cubes       '/z cup thinly-sliced green
     (peeled or unpeeled)              pepper (optional)
  I cup pineapple chunks            I cup thinly-sliced raw
     flesh or canned,                  carrots (optional)
     unsweetened)                   ?4 -l/z cup walnut pieces
  ?4 cup raisins

Combine all ingredients.
Blend with 1 cup of yoghurt dressing or mayonnaise.
Serve on lettuce leaves.


                Zucchini and Tomato Salad
  2 cups diced uncooked       I small green pepper cut
     zucchini or cucumber        into narrow ribbons
  2 cups dicedpesh tomatoes I stalk celeiy, chopped
     (includejuice)           vinaigrette dressing
  % cup choppedgreen onion

Prepare vegetables and add dressing.
Chill in refrigerator for one hour before serving.
                        Goumet Section



                    SALAD DRESSINGS
                        Mayonnaise
May be made in a blender or food processor (using steel blade).
if made in processor, recipe can be doubled. However, the recipe
cannot be doubled if a blender is used; it will not thicken
properly.

  I whole e~                      salt and pepper to taste
  I - 1 1/4 cups oil              I crushed saccharin
  I tablespoon white vine-           (% gain)
    gar orcfi-esh lemonjuice         or a little honey
  % teaspoon dry mustard             (optional)
     powder
Any vegetable oil or a combination of oils may be used.
Process in blender or processor for a few seconds: egg, lemon
juice (or vinegar), and mustard.
While the machine is running, add the oil in a fine stream.
Do not add oil quickly; it should take at least 60 seconds.
As mayonnaise thickens, the sound of the machine will deepen.
With the machine running, add sweetener, and other seasonings.

Suggestions:
Use to thicken gravy: Add 2 tablespoons mayonnaise to about 1
  cup of gravy liquid and heat gently for about 1 - 2 minutes,
  stirring constantly.
Use a s a base for tartar sauce by adding l i z cup chopped dill
  pickles (unsweetened) and $14 chopped onion.
Use a s a mock Hollandaise sauce by adding grated cheddar
  cheese: Spread on vegetables such as cooked cauliflower or
  broccoli. Cover and heat in oven.
Mix with yoghurt (1 part mayonnaise, 1 part homemade
  yoghurt) and use as a salad dressing.
                     Vinaigrette Dressing
May be used for salads or for marinating chilled vegetables.
Combine in a small bowl:
  % teaspoon salt                   1 tablespoon vinegar or
  -72 teaspoon pepper                  lemonjuice
  1 tablespoon olive oil            % teaspoon dry mustard
                                       powder
Beat these ingredients well with a fork or a whisk until blended.
Add:
  1 tablespoon vinegar or           3 tablespoons olive oil
     lemonjuice                     1 whole clove garlic,
                                      peeled
Store in a covered jar in a cold place until ready for use.
Shake well before using.


                   Yoghurt Salad Dressing
May be used for fruit salads or vegetable salads
 1 cup homemadeyoghurt
 Juice o f 1 lemon
 Honey or crushed saccharin
Mix yoghurt and lemon juice and sweeten to taste with liquid
honey or crushed saccharin tablets.
I02                       Gounnet Section



                       VEGETABLES

               Baked Acorn (Pepper) Squash
  1 acorn squash                    grated orange rind
  a little butter                      f?4 teaspoonfor each
  a little honey                       squash ham

Cut acorn squash in half and use ?4 squash for each serving.
Scoop out seed cavity of each squash half.
Place cut side down on a cookie sheet and bake at 400°F (200°C)
until a dull knife goes through squash easily.
Turn face up and dot with butter, honey, and grated orange rind.
Return to oven and bake another 15-30 minutes at 350°F
(180°C).

Variation: These squash "boats" may also be filled with a mix-
ture of cooked poultry or cooked meat which has been mixed
with vegetables and moistened with broth, yoghurt, or onion
gravy (see pg. 109).


                   Butternut Squash Slices
  I butternut squash
  small amount butter
  sak to taste
Slice the neck of a butternut squash (not necessary to peel). If
crispness is desired, slice very thinly, about ?h"thick. If cut thin,
these may be used as a substitute for French-fried potatoes.
Place on cookie sheet or pizza pan, dot with butter, and bake in a
hot oven 450°F (230°C) until one side is brown.
Turn and brown other side.
                              Recipes



                         Carrot Curls
This recipe may be used as a substitute for potato chips or when
something crisp is desired.
Using a potato peeler, make curls out of about 3 carrots.
Deep fry in oil until they turn golden brown.
Drain in a colander or strainer. Refrigerate oil for next batch.
(Do not use oil more than 3 times as it may become rancid.)
Turn carrot curls onto a paper towel and pat dry.
Salt to taste.



                   Cauliflower "Potatoes"

This is a delicious substitute for mashed potatoes.

  2 large caulflower; cut          salt, pepper to taste
        into pieces                parsley and paprika
  1/4   cup butter or % cup          garnish
        homemade yoghurt

Cook cauliflower until just tender. Drain.
Puree in blender or food processor.
Add butter or yoghurt, salt and pepper, and blend thoroughly.
Reheat and serve.
Garnish with parsley and paprika.
The pureed cauliflower may be placed in a baking dish, sprinkled
with grated cheddar cheese and heated in the oven until the
cheese melts.
                        Goumzet Section



                  Sweet and Sour Lentils
  1 cup lentils                   3 tablespoons honey
  2 tablespoons white vinegar     2 tablespoons butter

Soak lentils overnight and throw away the water.
Add fresh water to cover lentils and simmer until tender. Drain.
Add remaining ingredients, heat and serve.
MAIN DISHES, POULTRY STUFFING, GRAVY

                   Baked Bean Casserole
Introduce this recipe when diarrhea has cleared up.

  1 lb. dried white beans         -25 - r teaspoon @
  1-2 whole onions                   mustard powder
  meag bone (ham, be&             3 tablespoons vinegar
     etc.)                        3-6 tablespoons honey
  r large can tomatojuice         salt and pepper
     (48Juid ounces)
Soak beans overnight in cold water. Drain and throw away
water. Rinse beans thoroughly under running water.
Cover with fresh water and simmer at low heat until beans are
tender.
This may take over 2 hours. Do not salt beans before boiling;
they will not become tender.
Add remaining ingredients and bake in oven at 300°F (150°C)
until beans are very soft and tomato juice has thickened.
More tomato juice may have to be added while beans are baking
to prevent them from sticking to the pan and burning.
Stir occasionally.
Beans should bake a minimum of 2 hours.
Before serving, cut meat off bone and discard bone.
Serve hot or cold.
                  Baked Cottage Cheese
  I cup uncreamed cottage        I teaspoon honey
     cheese fd?y c u r .         I teaspoon butter
  1 egg
Blend all ingredients.
Pour mixture into a greased baking dish and bake at 350°F
(180°C) until of firm consistency and slightly browned around
the edges (about 15 or 20 minutes).


                      Chicken Royale
  2 lbs. chicken parts           2 whole green onions,
  I cup sliced or diced             including stems, sliced
     cawots                      4 cloves_fi-eshgarlic
  I cupJLesh or$-ozen            I tablespoon oil
     caulflower pieces           ?bteaspoon paprika
  I whole tomato, diced          salt to taste
Wash and drain chicken parts.
Heat oil, add garlic and green onions and saute for 2 minutes.
Add chicken and cook for 5 minutes.
Add paprika and tomato, cover and cook for 10 minutes on
medium heat.
Add cauliflower, carrots, and salt and cook for another five
minutes.
(Recipe courtesy of Zairun and Aleesa Hosein)
                             Recipes



                     Chicken Croquettes
Turkey or cooked ham may be substituted for chicken.
  2 cups cooked, boneless, trimmed chicken
  2-3 tablespoons almond'our
  1 e&g
  1 small onion, quartered
  2-3 tablespoons butterf o r m i n g
  Season to taste with salt, peppet; herbs, etc.
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley (optional)
  Sprigs ofparsley and lemon wedgesfor garnish
This recipe may be made in a food processor using the metal
blade.
If a processor is not used, finely chop chicken and onion before
mixing with other ingredients.
Using the food processor:
Place cubed chicken, onion, egg, and chopped parsley into
processor bowl.
Blend until smooth.
Add about half of the almond flour, seasonings, and blend for a
few more seconds.
Using your hands to shape the croquettes, determine if mixture
is stiff enough to shape. If mixture is not stiff enough, add addi-
tional almond flour, a tablespoon at a time, until mixture can be
handled easily.
Shape mixture into pancake forms keeping them about 3lI'" in
diameter for easy turning.
Fry in butter over medium heat until golden brown and turn.
Serve hot, garnished with parsley sprigs and lemon wedges.
                        Gourmet Section



                       Poultry Stuffing
                      (For a large bird)
  2 cups dried white beans        1 teaspoon ground sage
      (navy beans)                1 teaspoon ground thyme
  1 cup chopped onion             chopped parsley
  '/z cup chopped celev              (optional)
                                  salt and pepper to taste
Soak beans overnight and throw away the water.
Cover with fresh water (do not salt before cooking or beans will
be tough) and cook until tender. Drain.
Mix chopped onion, celery, and herbs with beans and mash with
a potato masher.
Season to taste with salt and pepper.
Fill cavity of turkey or chicken with bean mixture and roast.



                  Ginger-Yoghurt Chicken
  4 whole chicken breasts         1 teaspooncfeshhly grated
  2 cups homemadeyoghurt            ginger
  1/2 CUP nutfour                 salt to taste
                                  butterforjying chicken
Split each breast down the back into two pieces.
Heat frying pan, add butter and brown the raw chicken. Do not
cook completely.
Salt chicken.
Remove from heat.
Mix yoghurt, almond flour, and grated ginger.
Arrange chicken in a single layer in an oven-safe pan.
Spread the yoghurt mixture over the surface of each piece of
chicken, using all of the mixture.
Place, uncovered, in a 325°F (160°C) oven.
Bake '/z hour or until chicken is tender.
(Recipe courtesy of Zairun Hosein)
                           Recipes


                            Gravy
May be used as a thickened gravy for poultry or meat.
Type 1:
While roast is in the oven, boil an onion.
While poultry is in oven, boil an onion together with poultry
giblets.
When the meat is done, pour the drippings into a container and
skim off fat.
Place cooked onion and skimmed drippings (at least 1 cup) into
blender and puree.
Qpe 2:
For each cup of liquid, add 2 tablespoons of homemade mayon-
naise.
Heat gently for about a minute, stirring constantly.
(Recipe courtesy of Roberta Young)
                        Gourmet Section



               Honey-Garlic Chicken Wings
  2 Zbs. chicken wings            I tablespoon lemonjuice
  I tablespoon butter             salt and pepper to taste
  % cup honey                     crushed garlic clove
  1 teaspoon grated lemon
     rind
Place wings in baking dish.
Melt butter and add honey, lemon juice and rind.
Dust wings with salt and pepper.
Pour half of honey mixture over wings and coat evenly.
Bake wings at 350°F (180°C) for 15 minutes.
Add remaining honey mixture.
Continue baking until wings are tender and browned.



                  Honey-Garlic Spareribs
  3 lbs. pork spareri3.s or       2-4 tablespoons crushed
     ham hocks funsmoked)           JLesh garlic or
  ?bcup honey                        4 tablespoons garlic
  I cup water                        chips
                                  1 teaspoon salt
Parboil pork and remove excess fat if hocks are used.
Mix remaining ingredients and pour over parboiled pork which
has been placed in a large roasting pan or baking dish.
Bake at 375°F (190°C) for at least 1 hour turning and basting at
least twice until the honey begins to caramelize on the meat.
                        Fish Casserole
  I lb.Ji-esh,Ji-ozen,or           I teaspoon @ymustard
      cannedfish (halibut,           powder
     flounder, sole, shrimp,       I tablespoon chopped
      lobster, or crabmeat)          parsley
  '/z lb. grated cheddar           I tablespoon lemonjuice
      cheese
  I cup homemadeyoghurt

Poach fresh or frozen fish for a few minutes until cooked
through.
Drain, if using canned fish, or cool poached fish, and using fork,
break into bite-size pieces.
Mix remaining ingredients thoroughly and add to fish.
Bake in ovenware at 375°F (190°C) until brown on top. This
should take about 30-40 minutes.
This recipe may also be used as an appetizer. Bake as instructed
and serve in small portions.
                        Gounnet Section



                           Pizza #1
Crust:
  3% cups coarsely grated,         '/z cup grated, 100%pure,
     unpeeled, zucchini               parmesan cheese
    squash f                       1 tablespoonfpesh basil
  3 ems, lightly beaten              leaves, minced (dried
  % cup almondJour                   may be substituted but-
  % cup gated brick cheese           use only % tablespoon)
     (any permissible mild         % teaspoon salt
    cheese will do)
?Salt grated zucchirti squash with 'ilteaspoon salt and let stand
for 15 minutes to draw out excess water. Squeeze zucchini with
hands to get rid of as much water a s possible.
Mix all ingredients well and spread onto an oiled pizza pan or
small cookie sheet. Pat smooth.
Bake for 30 minutes at 325°F (160°C) or undl crust is dry and
browned.
Brush the top of the crust with oil and broil it under moderate
heat for 5 minutes. Add filling.

Alternative cmst:
Cheese bread recipe (pg 124) may be used. For a large pizza, use
about l/3 of recipe. Pat down in pizza pan until about 'h - 'is''
thick. Bake at 350°F until golden brown. -Add filling.

Filling:
  &-I Zb, brick cheese,           afew of thefollowing:
     thinly sliced                  mushrooms, olives,
  1 ?hcups tomato sauce             strips ofgreen pepper;
     (made by simmering             crispIyJi-ied bacon
     about-3-4 cups tomato          pieces, cooked ham
    juice)                          slivers, anchovies,
                                    tomato slices, etc.
Layer cheese on baked crust.
Spread generously with thick tomato sauce.
Add your choice of toppings.
Heat pizza in a 350°F (1 80°C) oven for about 25 minutes until it
is very hot and cheese is bubbling.
Serve hot with a tossed salad,
                    John'sPizza Recipe #2
I have always been a pizza connoisseur, and today I came up
with a pizza that I think tastes close to the real thing. It is very
simple to make, I hope you like it.

Crust:
  ?hcup almondJour (add             1 teaspoon extra virgin
    more as necessayJor a              olive oil
    workable dough                  -% teaspoon salt
    consistency)                    Italian spices such as
  1eB                                  oregano and basil to
                                       taste
In a bowl mix the above ingredients together and add more flour
a s needed to form a ball. Oil a pan with olive oil (we use a pizza
pan but if you have a non-stick pizza pan, all the better). Add
the dough ball pressing down with hands to form the shape of a
small pizza crust. Do not worry if it is not as big as the pan.
Preheat the oven to 350°F with the crust in pan (this allows the
crust to setup and brown a bit.) By the time the oven heats up,
the crust should be crisp and ready for the toppings.

Topping:                   Optional:
  Very thin-sliced tomatoes Italian seasoning may be
 Navarti cheese                increased to include
 Basil and oregano             others thatyou like
                               such as garlic, etc.
Drizzle with olive oil and bake for 10 minutes.

(Recipe courtesy of John Higgins and Aggieo)
                       Gourmet Section


                  "Spaghetti"and Sauce
  1 lb. ground beef (lean)       %-I teaspoon oregano
  1 large can tomatojuice        1 tablespoon olive oil
     (48fluid ounces)            salt and pepper to taste
  3-4J-eshtomatoes, f            1 spaghetti squash (most
     available                      large supemarkets can
  1 large onion                    get these f they don't
  1-2 cloves garlic (optiona2)      c a w them)
  1 bay leaf
Sauce:
Chop onion and garlic and brown in oil in a heavy skillet.
Remove onion, set aside, and brown meat in the same pan.
Transfer meat and onion to large pot and add tomato juice, bay
leaf, oregano and seasonings.
Simmer to desired thickness; this may take 1 hour or longer.
Spaghetti Squash:
Cut the spaghetti squash in half lengthwise.
Steam on a rack over boiling water in a large covered pan or
steamer until just tender. DO NOT overcook as squash can
become too soft and watery.
Lift out strings of "spaghetti" from squash with a fork.
Serve smothered in hot spaghetti sauce.
Grated Parmesan or romano cheese may be used to top.
The spaghetti sauce may also be used to top boiled white (navy)
beans or another type of squash (zucchini, butternut, Hubbard).
                      Zucchini Noodles
This recipe had its origin in the fact that as much as I like
spaghetti squash, I often couldn't find one when I was in the
mood for SCD-style "pasta". But I could always And zucchini!
  6-8 medium zucchini
     for 1-2medium zucchini per person)
Peel zucchinis and remove stem tops.
Using the vegetable peeler, scrape strips off the entire length of
each zucchini.
For easier peeling, insert a metal shish kebob skewer down the
center, and hold onto the skewer while scraping the "noodles"
from the zucchini.
Keep peeling until the entire zucchini is in shreds. Or, if even
zucchini seeds are a problem, stop when you reach the seeds and
freeze the remaining chunks for vegetable broth.
Pile the zucchini "noodles" on a buttered baking sheet and cook
in a preheated 215°F oven for about 25 minutes. The objective
of the low temperature is to cook the zucchini while evaporating
as much of the excess water as possible.
Serve topped with plain butter and a little salt, or with any of
your favorite sauces such as Mock Hollandaise.
                        Gourrnet Section



                      Stuffed Zucchini
  6 zucchini squash               4 tablespoons melted
  I garlic clove, crushed            butter
  I % cups gr~undbeef             salt and pepper to taste
  I cup cheddar cheese (or        I tablespoon chopped
     other hard cheese),            Ji-esh basil or
    grated                           ?4 teaspoon dried basil
  2 eggs slightly beaten             (optional)

Pan fry the ground beef in a little butter until cooked through.
Cut the zucchini squash in half lengthwise and carefully hollow
out the flesh to within inch of the skin.
Set the shells aside.
Chop the zucchini flesh, then press with the back of a wooden
spoon to extract as much juice as possible and drain it away.
Set the flesh aside.
Preheat the oven to 400°F (200°C).
Combine the zucchini flesh, garlic, ground beef, basil, cheese,
seasoning, eggs and half the melted butter until they are thor-
oughly blended.
Arrange the zucchini shells skin-side down in a well-greased
shallow baking pan.
Stuff with the beef mixture and pour the remaining melted butter
over the stuffed squash.
Place dish in oven and bake for 20-30 minutes or until the top is
brown and bubbling.
Serve at once.
                       Zucchini Casserole
Use any amount of the following vegetables; the size of your pan
or casserole should be your guide.

  zucchini squash, sliced            ?bcup grated Parmesan
 Jiesh tomatoes, sliced                cheese (optional)
  onions, sliced                     Seasoning: oregano, salt,
 green peppers, sliced                 Pepper
     (optional)
  I tablespoon salad oil
     (olive oil is best in this
     recipe)for each 4 cups
     of vegetables
Slice raw vegetables and layer in a casserole. A shallow casse-
role is preferable but any size may be used.
Pour salad oil over vegetables.
Sprinkle seasonings and grated cheese over top.
Add a little water to casserole if there is not sufficient juices from
the vegetables. There should be at least '/2 inch liquid at the bot-
tom of the casserole when you start baking.
Place in hot oven 400°F (200°C),     uncovered, and bake until veg-
etables are tender.
Stir occasionally so that the top vegetables do not get too brown.
If this recipe is made on top of stove, it turns out to be a veg-
etable stew and has a completely different consistency.
                       Gourmet Section


                     Zucchini Lasagna
  r -% lbs. ground beef          -% cup Colby, brick, or
  2 medium-sized zucchini            havarti cheese, grated
     squash, cut lengthwise          or slicedfor topping.
     in -% inch slices           1 medium-sized onion
  2 cups uncreamed cottage       1 cup mushrooms, sliced
     cheese ( d y curd)              (optionall
  I cup tomatojuice              1 teaspoon oregano
                                 1/4 teaspoon ground basil
                                 salt and pepper to taste
Brown meat in a little oil; set aside.
Line baking dish with zucchini slices.
Mix uncreamed cottage cheese with beef and spread over zucchi-
ni slices.
Season tomato juice with herbs, salt and pepper and pour over
other ingredients
Top with cheese.
Bake at 375°F (190°C) until zucchini squash is tender and
cheese blends with other ingredients.
This recipe may be eaten hot as a main course or cold as an
appetizer.
   Stir-Fried Vegetables with Chicken, Beef, or Pork

  caul'ower pieces                 peppers, sliced in srrips
  broccoli pieces, including       onions, sliced
     the stem                      edible-podded peas
  celey, sliced                       (optional)
  carrots, sliced                  chicken breasts, steamed
  zucchini squash, sliced             OR sirloin or round
  mushrooms, sliced                   steak, semi;fi-ozen
  tomatoes, quartered
The quantity of each ingredient depends on the number of people
to be served.
A heavy iron frying pan or a wok should be used.
Saute in butter, using medium heat, any combination of, or all of,
the listed vegetables.
Begin by cooking the vegetables that take longer to tenderize
(carrots, cauliflower, broccoli).
After a few minutes, add the rest of the vegetables, except the
tomatoes.
Turn heat to simmer, cover pan or wok, and cook until all vegeta-
bles are barely tender.
Add tomatoes and cook about 1 minute longer.
Season with salt and pepper.
Add prepared meat or chicken and serve piping hot.
Preparation of meat:
Chicken: Steam until tender. Remove skin and bones. Cut in
large chunks. Brown in a separate pan in butter. A little honey
may be added to the meat if desired. Set aside until you are
ready to combine with vegetables.
Be& Semi-frozen beef is easy to slice. Slice in thin strips, across
grain. Brown pieces of beef in a separate skillet in butter. Set
aside until ready to combine with vegetables.
Pork: Use left-over pork roast. Slice in thin strips and set aside
until ready to combine with vegetables.
                        Gourmet Section



                    Vegetable Meat Loaf
  I % lbs. ground beef            spdg of parsley
  1e B                            1 stalk ofceler-y, cut in
  I mediumfiesh tomato or           pieces
     % cup tomatojuice            small amount ofgeen
  I medium onion, cut in             Pepper
     pieces                       1 caw06 cut in pieces

Place tomato or tomato juice into blender first. Push down on
tomato to release juices so that blender blades will turn easily.
Add egg and blend for a few seconds.
Add remaining vegetables and blend until fairly sm0oth.t
Empty blender contents into bowl and mix well with ground
beef.
Season with salt and pepper.
Form mixture into a loaf and place in a shallow pan.
Spread top with homemade quick ketchup (see pg. 94).
Bake at 350°F (180°C) oven for about 1 hour.
tYou may have to stop blender and push vegetables down to
contact blender blades.
       MUFFINS, BREAD, AND PANCAKES

              Basic Muffin and Bread Recipe
     Nuts suitable for this recipe are walnuts, almonds, pecans,
and filberts (hazel nuts). Peanuts should not be used. Although
they are usually very expensive, some people prefer unroasted raw
cashews. Raw cashews are highly perishable so you must be sure
that they have been stored properly. Roasted cashews most often
contain starch and are, therefore, not permitted. Your choice of
nuts should depend upon price, availability, and personal taste
preference. Almonds are usually the least expensive and the choice
of most people because of their delicate flavor.
     Almonds with skins (brownish in color) are suitable for this
recipe although, at the beginning of the diet, blanched almonds
(without the fibrous skin) will be less gas-forming. After marked
improvement, almonds with skins may be used. Twenty-five
pound boxes (or larger) often may be purchased at a discount. If
large amounts are bought, they should be kept in the refrigerator
or deep freeze to prevent rancidity. In the Appendix, further
instructions, regarding ordering nuts in the most inexpensive way,
are given.
     The nuts must be ground to a fine consistency-a consistency
similar to whole wheat flour. If they are overground, they turn into
nut butter which may be used but will make the batter a bit more
fluid.
     It is advisable to grind your own nuts for the first 3-4 weeks
on the diet. It is true that ground nuts are available and would be
a time saver. It is strongly advised, however, that you grind your
own to ensure that the ground nuts are fresh and pure with no
added extenders. When you have decided to commit yourself to
the diet for a longer period, then the ground nuts can be purchased
in large quantities in sealed boxes.
     If the nuts are ground in a blender, do not process more than
% CUP at one time. Grind to the consistency of whole wheat flour
stopping the blender occasionally and scraping around the sides
with a kitchen knife or spatula.
     The food processor grinds nuts satisfactorily: use the steel
blade and make sure it runs long enough to grind the nuts to the
222                      Goumet Section


consistency of whole wheat flour.
     The nuts may also be ground in an electric or manual food
grinder.
     In the recipes that follow, the term "nut flour" will be used
interchangeably with the term "ground nuts"; they mean the same
thing.
The following ingredients make 16 muffins.
Preheat oven to 375°F (190°C).
  2% CUPS p u n d nuts              % cup honey f (more or
  1/4 cup melted butter or %      less as desired)
       cup homemadeyoghurt, ?bteaspoon baking soda
       or s d amount o f ' i t ?& teaspoon salt (option-
      juice, or pure apple        al)
       butter (add last and    3 eggs (geggs must be
       adjust amount depend-      avoided, use purded
       ing on the consisten~     Jizrit to hold ingredients
       ofthe batter)              together)
tHONEY: All recipes calling for honey as a sweetener work better
if honey is in liquid form. If honey has crystallized, melt over low
heat.
Using a blender:
After grinding the nuts in the blender, empty them into a bowl.
Place eggs and honey into blender, and mix thoroughly.
Add the egg mixture to the nuts and blend by hand or with an
electric beater.
Add butter or yoghurt as needed to bring to a muffin batter con-
sistency.
Blend in baking soda and salt.
Using a food processor:
After grinding nuts, allow the ground nuts to remain in the
processor bowl.
Add other ingredients, adding butter or yoghurt last according to
how much liquid you need to bring the batter to a muffin batter
consistency.
Line cupcake tins with paper cupcake liners.
Spoon batter into cupcake tins filling about one-half full.
Bake at 375°F (190°C) for about 15-20 minutes or until muffins
spring back when pressed.
It is difficult to bake "light", high muffins without regular flour
and the muffins may fall after they have been removed from the
oven. This will not affect their taste.
Variations:
1. Add lh cup raisins or currents.
2. Add juice of one orange and some grated orange rind.
3. Add grated orange rind and chopped dried fruit cut into small
   pieces. About ?h cup of any of these: apricots, sun dried
   pineapple, apples, pears.
4. Add 1-2 teaspoons of grated orange rind and ?hteaspoon
   almond flavor,
5. NUT BREAD-Add one more egg (4 altogether) to batter and
   bake in a well-buttered, 1 quart baking dish.
6. BANANA NUT BREAD-Add one more egg and two mashed
   extra-ripe bananas to batter.
7. COCONUT-NUT MUFFINS-Substitute dried, unsweetened,
   grated coconut for part of the nut flour. Do not introduce
   coconut substitution until diarrhea has cleared up.
8. ELAINE'S FAVORITE VARIATION-After all other ingredients
   are mixed thoroughly, stir in gently ?h-?4 CUP fresh or frozen
   blueberries.
                        Gourmet Section


                         Cheese Bread
This bread can be sliced and used for French toast; dip in beaten
egg and fry in butter.
Syrup of hot honey (with a little water added) may be used to top
French toast.
Heat oven to 350°F (180°C)
  2% cups ground blanched            I teaspoon baking soda
     almonds for other               '/s teaspoon salt
     allowable nut)                  3e   ~ s
                                           beaten
  ?+ CUP so_ftned butter
  I cup bland cheese (brick,
     colby, or mild cheddar)
     cut into v e y small piems
Mix butter, nut flour, and cheese.
Add eggs, baking soda, and salt.
Pour into a well buttered loaf pan (approx. 4 x 8 inches) and
bake until golden brown on top.


                      Banana Pancakes
  I ripe banana, mashed
  I ezix
  butterJorJiYing
Beat ingredients together.
Drop on a greased pan and brown over medium heat.
Turn and brown other side.
Serve hot with honey syrup (honey diluted with water and heat-
ed)t
tAdd maple extract and a little butter to hot honey syrup for a
maple syrup substitute.
              Deanna's Pancakes with a m i s t
  4 eggs                             '/Z cup uncreamed cottage
  2 tablespoons honey                   cheese f@     curd)
  I teaspoon vanilla                 I cup almond_four
  % teaspoon baking soda               fa@ust this amount to
  -% teaspoon salt                     get pancake batter
  I banana                             consistency)

Blend all ingredients except almond flour in the food processor
until smooth.
Stir in the almond flour.
Pour into a well-buttered frying pan and fry until crispy on the
edges.
If syrup is desired, heat up a little honey with a drop of maple fla-
vor.
(Recipe courtesy of Deanna Gold and Katie Fischer)



        Deanna's (Midas Gold) PancakesIWaffles
  I cup almondJlour                  I teaspoon vanilla
  4 eggs                             -% teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons honey                -% teaspoon baking soda

Mix together and pour on a greased griddle to make pancakes. Works
great in a wafile maker, too!
                    Herb's Bean Pancakes
Introduce this recipe when diarrhea has cleared up.
  I cup, soaked, cooked            I / g teaspoon baking soda
     and well drained              salt to taste
     white beans                   homemadeyoghurt a s
  I small onion                         needed
  I eg;g
A food processor, blender or electric mixer may be used. If using
a blender, place egg in blender first so that blades can turn easi-
ly, Place all ingredients in bowl or blender and blend until batter
is smooth.
If batter is not a consistency which can be poured easily (as for
pancakes), add yoghurt, a teaspoon at a time, and blend in well.
Using a well-buttered frying pan, pour batter as you would
pancake batter.
Using medium heat, turn pancakes after about 8 - 10 minutes.
Cook an additional 8 minutes on other side.
The above ingredients make 4 medium-sized pancakes.
Do not use beans that have not been drained well as batter will
be too watery.
A large batch of beans can be prepared in advance and can be
frozen in suitably sized containers.
                 Lois Lang's Luscious Bread
This bread resembles a moist whole wheat bread. It slices nicely,
can be toasted and can be used for grilled sandwiches.
  2% cups blanched, ground 1 teaspoon baking soda
     almonds (almondflour) % teaspoon salt
  % - % cup melted butter  3 eg;ps
  I cup d y curd cottage
     cheese (press down as
    you measure*)
Preheat oven to 350°F (180°C)
Place eggs, melted butter, dry curd cottage cheese, baking soda,
and salt in food processor using metal blade. Process until the
mixture is thick and resembles butter in texture.
Add almond flour and process until mixed thoroughly. If the
stiffness of the mixture stops the processor, remove the dough
with wet hands and knead by hand until almond flour is
thoroughly mixed into other ingredients.
Grease a loaf pan (about 4" x 8") generously with butter and
coat bottom with ground almond flour.
Using wet hands, shape dough into a loaf shape and press into
greased pan.
Bake at 350"-375°F for about 1hour until lightly browned on top. There
will be a crack on the top of the loaf. Check by inserting a metal
kitchen knife; it will come out clean when bread is done. Remove from
oven and run a metal spatula around the sides of the pan pressing
gently against the loaf to loosen it at the corners and bottom of pan.
Remove bread by inverting the pan onto a cake rack. Allow to
cool thoroughly before you cut it. Don't cut it while it is piping
hot. It needs to firm up its texture.
Variations:
1. Add 1 tablespoon caraway seeds with the flour and you will get
   bread that resembles rye bread.
2. Add about % cup raisins andlor other dried fruit as a last step when
   you are kneading it into a loaf shape and you will have a tea loaf.
(Reape comky @LokLug)
*If you are unable to find the dry cottage cheese, use one cup of
the drained homemade yoghurt (Cream cheese recipe-pg. 160).
                         Gourmet Section



                       Zucchini Muffins
  3 cups grated zucchini            '/Z - 2/3 cup liquid honey
  3 eggs, beaten                       fuse less, $desired)
  3 cups nutflour                  2 teaspoons cinnamon
  -% cup melted butter              I teaspoon baking soda
                                    '/Z teaspoon salt

Mix almond flour, melted butter, honey, and zucchini.
Add beaten eggs, cinnamon, salt, and baking soda. Mix well.
Bake in muffin tins, lined with papers, at 350°F (180°C) for
about 20 minutes or until done.



                        Sandwich Rolls
This recipe makes 12 rolls - perfect for cheeseburgers or turkey
sandwiches with bacon, lettuce, and tomato.

  I cup uncreamed cottage           I tsp. baking soda
    cheese (dry curd)              3 eggs
  % cup melted butter              2% cups almondflour
  % cup honey

The secret in making rolls that don't flatten (although flat tastes
good too), is to add the eggs after the first four ingredients. For
fluffy batter, do not let the processor run too long after the
addition of the eggs.

Mix first four ingredients briefly in the food processor and beat
until it is fluf@ - like whipped cream. Add eggs and beat briefly.
Remove from processor and add almond flour. Stir in thoroughly
with a mixing spoon or spatula. Put large tablespoons of batter
on a greased baking sheet and run a wet hand or spoon over
each roll. Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 15 minutes.

(Recipe courtesy of Steve Diehl)
                            CAKES

                        Banana Cake
  3 cups nutflour                 I teaspoon baking soda
  3 egps, beaten                  2 mashed bananas
  I/q   cup melted butter            (extra ripe)
  ?b -2/3 cup honey

Mix all ingredients.
Pour into a buttered baking pan.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) until top springs back when touched
(about 40 minutes).


                         Carrot Cake

  1% cups nutflour                I teaspoon baking soda
  1 % cupsJinely shredded         % cup butter
      can-ots                     2 eggs
  3/4 cup honey                   I teaspoon cinnamon
  % cup raisins                   pinch salt
  % cup walnuts (optional)        1 teaspoon vanilla

Add honey and eggs to softened butter and blend.
Blend in nut flour, soda, salt, cinnamon, and vanilla.
Add carrots, raisins, and nuts.
Bake at 350°F (180°C),45-60 minutes.
This cake has a tendency to overflow; therefore, use a large bak-
ing pan. A one-quart (1 liter) loaf pan lined with greased waxed
paper is satisfactory.
This recipe may be used as a carrot pudding by decreasing the
amount of almond flour.
                        Gounnet Section


                         Cheese Cake
The cheese cake filling may be made without a crust. But for spe-
cial occasiorls when you want a crust, line the bottom of a small
loaf pan with Almond honey crisp recipe (see page 132),keeping
it as thin as possible.
Bake crust and cool thoroughly.
Filling:
  3 eg;gs                         2 cups uncreamed cottage
  % CUP honey                        cheese f d g curd)
  % cup homemade yoghurt          2 teaspoons vanilla
     or cream cheese made            extract
    Jam yoghua [see pg.            1-2 teaspoons grated
     160)                            lemon rind
Place all ingredients in blender or food processor (metal blade)
putting eggs in first so that blender blades will turn freely.
Blend until smooth, stopping if necessary every 15 seconds to
push ingredients down. Scrape the sides of the container at the
same time with a spatula,
Pour into loaf pan with or without crust.
If desired, place drained, unsweetened canned pineapple slices
on top of filling.
Bake in oven at 350°F (180°C) for about 30 minutes or until
edges are brown.
Cool and refrigerate.
                           Date Loaf
  3 eggs                           I teaspoon salt
  -% cup honey                     '/Z pound pitted, chopped
  -% cup melted butter                dates
  '/Z cup homemade yoghurt            (Cal'omia dates on@
  '/Z teaspoon baking soda         pecan or walnut pieces
  3 cups pecan or almond
    Jour
Preheat oven to 325°F (160°C).
Mix together all ingredients, reserving pecan or walnut pieces for
top.
Pour batter into a well greased and floured (with nut flour) loaf
pan.
Decorate top with nut pieces.
Bake until knife placed in center comes out clean - about 45 min-
utes.
(Recipe courtesy of Lois Lang)


                           Nut Torte
  I '/Z cups blanched almonds or pecans
  ?b cup honey
  8 egg whites

Grind nuts, % CUPS at a time, in blender.
Return ground nuts to blender, add honey, and blend well.
In a large mixing bowl, beat egg whites until stiff.
Very gradually fold honey-nut mixture into egg whites.
Pour into three greased layer cake pans.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 35 minutes or until a kitchen
knife comes out clean.
Cool. Fill between layers with custard filling or honey frosting.
132                     Goumet Section



                         COOKIES

                   Almond-Honey Crisps
This recipe may also be used to make a pie crust. Line pie plate
with parchment paper to prevent sticking.
  r cup whole almoncik            2 teaspoons vanilla
  % cup butter                       (unsweetened)
  1/3 - ?& CUP honey

Process nuts in a blender for only a few seconds until nuts are
coarsely chopped. Do not overchop or you will get a flour-like
texture which is not suitable for this recipe.
Place chopped almonds in a bowl and set aside.
Put butter, honey, and vanilla in blender, pushing ingredients
down to bottom of container before turning blender on.
Process for about 30 seconds until ingredients are whipped.
Transfer mixture to bowl containing chopped nuts and blend
thoroughly with a spatula.
Spread in a shallow cake pan and bake at 375°F (190°C) until
golden brown.
Cut into squares while still warm.


                       Cheese Cookies
  .'/Z cup dry curd cottage       I teaspoon honey
     cheese                       2 teaspoons nutflour
  r egg white
Mix ingredients.
Drop on greased cookie sheet.
Bake in 325°F (160°C) oven until brown.
                     Date-Filled Cookies
  4 cups nutflour                 % teaspoon salt
  % CUP butter, melted            I/z CUP honey
  -Z4 teaspoon baking soda

Mix all ingredients well.
Roll into small balls.
Place on a greased cookie sheet and press balls into flat cookies
with the back of a buttered teaspoon.
Bake at 300°F (150°C) until golden brown.
Remove from pan and cool.

Filling:
  1 lb. pitted dates
      fCal$ornia dates only)
  % cup water

Put dates and water in a covered oven-safe saucepan and bake in
the oven until soft. This should take about 15 minutes in a
350°F (180°C) oven. This date mixture can be cooked on top of
stove but it has a tendency to scorch if not stirred constantly.
Stir occasionally while in oven.
Heat in oven until thick.
Cool.
Spread date filling between two cookies.



                  Peanut Butter Brownies
  1 cup peanut butter, no         ?hteaspoon baking soda
     additives                    1 eS7
  ?h cup honey

Mix all ingredients thoroughly, and pour into a well-buttered
eight inch square baking dish. Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about
25-30 minutes. Remove from oven when nicely browned.
Cool slightly and turn out of pan. Cut into brownie squares.
                          Goumet Section


                     Peanut Butter Cookies
  ?h cup butter                       1 cup nutfzour
  1 cup peanut butter, no            2 eggs
     additives                        l/p teaspoon baking soda
  ?hcup honey                         1 teaspoon vanilla

Cream butter until soft.
Add peanut butter and mix thoroughly.
Add remaining ingredients.
Drop on greased cookie sheet and bake in 325°F (160°C) oven
for 10 minutes.


                        Monster Cookies

  5 cups nutfzour                    95 cup melted butter
  1 cup raisins                      1 cup honey
  1 cup walnut pieces                2 eggs, beaten
  1 cupfzaked unsweetened            1 teaspoon baking soda
     coconut                         '/s teaspoon salt

Mix all ingredients.
Drop by large tablespoonfuls onto greased cookie sheet.
Press flat with a buttered fork. If fork is greased, it will not stick.
Bake at 325°F (160°C) until golden brown (15-20 minutes).
                           Recipes


                    Pumpkin Cookies
  3 cups nutflour            ?hcup butter
  I cup mashed, cooked,      I e2x
     drained pumpkin or      % CUP honey
    flesh orJ-ozenwinter     I teaspoon baking soda
     squash such as          ?4 teaspoon salt
     butternut or acorn. Do  ?4 teaspoon cinnamon
     not use canned pump-    ?4 teaspoon nutmeg
     kin. Summer squash      I teaspoon vanilla
     such as zucchini is too I cup raisins
     wateyfor this recipe.
Mix dry ingredients and raisins. Set aside.
Mix egg, butter, honey and vanilla in blender,
Add pumpkin or squash to egg mixture and blend thoroughly.
Add wet ingredients to the dry mixture.
Drop by rounded teaspoonfuls 2 inches apart on lightly greased
cookie sheet.
Bake 15 minutes at 375°F (190°C)until lightly browned.
Transfer to wire rack to cool.
Makes about 4 dozen cookies.
(Recipe courtesy of Nancy Ferguson)
136                      Gourmet Section



                         FROSTINGS

                    Cream Cheese Frosting
  1% cups d?y curd cottage cheese or
    drained homemadeyoghurt
  honey to sweeten
Place a little liquid honey in blender.
Gradually add dry curd cottage cheese or drained yoghurt.
Blend until smooth.
It may be necessary to stop blender occasionally and press
cheese down so that the blender blades can make contact.
Use as a frosting on carrot cake or banana cake.

                        Honey Frosting
  1 cup honey
  1 egg white, beaten
  1 teaspoon vanilla
Boil the honey until a drop forms a firm ball in cold water.
Add gradually to beaten egg white.
Whip until stiff and add vanilla.
This frosting is marshmallow-like and remains spreadable for
hours.
Use as a frosting for cakes; this frosting is especially good on the
nut torte.

              Honey Cream Whipped Topping
  2 cups French Cream (see recipe page 160)
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  % cup honey

Combine all ingredients and whip to stiff peaks.
(Recipe courtesy of David J. Couture)
                         DESSERTS

                      Apple Custard Pie
  4 or 5 baking apples                 cup apple cider
  1 tablespoon lemonjuice           ?4 teaspoon nutmeg
  ?bCUP honey                       2-3 tablespoons chopped
  3 ems                                almona% or walnuts
  3/4 CUP homemade yoghurt
     or homemade French
     Cream (see page 160)
Core and cut the apples into eighths.
Toss them in lemon juice which has been mixed with honey.
Arrange the apple slices round side down in a pie plate with a cir-
cle around the outer edge and another circle inside that, filling in
the center.
Bake in oven at 400°F (200°C) for 20 minutes.
Beat the eggs slightly, stir in yoghurt or French Cream, apple
cider and nutmeg.
Pour egg mixture over the apples and continue baking another
10 minutes.
Sprinkle the top with the chopped nuts and bake 10 minutes
longer or until the top is golden and the center firm.
Cool on a rack before cutting.
                       Gourmet Secton



                        Applesassies
  ?b cup butter                  I cup nutflour
 ?b cup honey                    % teaspoon baking soda
 2 eBs, light& beaten            I cup walnuts, chopped
 2k cup homemade                 3/4 cup raisins
    applesauce

Melt butter in a double boiler.
Sir in honey, eggs, and applesauce.
Mix baking soda with nut flour and stir into butter mixture.
Stir in raisins and walnuts, saving a few walnut pieces for
topping.
Turn into a greased 9 inch square pan.
Sprinkle with the reserved walnuts.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 30 minutes.
Cool in pan and serve topped with honey-sweetened whipped
uncreamed cottage cheese or French Cream.
(Recipe courtesy of Anne Haas Hall)



                  Baked Honey Apple Slices
  1/2 cup honey                 2 teaspoons butter
 juice of1 lemon                 % teaspoon cinnamon
  3 large cooking apples

Mix honey and lemon juice in shallow baking dish or pie pan.
Peel and core apples.
Cut apples in quarters, then slices.
Place in honey-juice mixture, coating well.
Dot with butter.
Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F (180°C) for about 30-40 min-
utes or until tender.
Baste with pan liquid twice during baking.
Can be topped with same cheese mixture as Applesassies
(above).
                            Custard
  2e    ~    s                     8 teaspoons honey
  I cup uncreamed cottage          dash of nutmeg
     cheese f d y curd)            pinch ofsalt
  2 teaspoons vanilla extract

Beat uncreamed cottage cheese and eggs in blender or food
processor until very smooth.
Add honey, vanilla and salt. Beat thoroughly.
Pour mixture into custard cups.
Sprinkle nutmeg on top of each cup.
Place custard cups in a pan half filled with water.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 20 minutes. Increase heat to
375°F (190°C) for another ten minutes or until browned on top.


                 Honey Glazed Whole Apples
  4 medium cooking apples          '/2 cup uncreamed cottage
  I cup water                        cheese (dry curd)
  I cup honey                         which has been blended
                                     until smooth with a
                                     little homemade
                                     yoghurt.
Pare and core apples.
Bring water and honey to a boil in a deep saucepan.
Slowly cook 2 apples at a time in a covered pan in the syrup until
apples are tender, turning apples occasionally.
Remove to dessert dishes.
Boil syrup until thick.
Cool syrup slightly and pour over apples.
Serve warm or chilled, topped with blended uncreamed cottage
cheese or French Cream.
                        Gourmet Section


               Honey-Walnut Baked Apples
  large applesfor baking          I tablespoon honeyfor
  raisins                            each apple
  walnut pieces                   cinnamon
Choose a variety of apple that bakes well such a s McIntosh, Spy,
Ida Red.
Core the apples with a sharp knife leaving them whole.
Arrange apples in a baking dish.
Mix together enough raisins (or currants) and walnuts with
honey to fill the cored-out apples.
Add cinnamon to this mixture according to taste.
Fill the apples with honey mixture.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) until apples are tender when poked with a
fork (about 1 hour).
                             Recipes



                           Ice Cream
  1 mashed banana or -22    1-2 cups homemade
     cup pureed unsweetened   yoghurt
     peaches, pineapple, or honey or saccharinfor
     strawbenies              sweetening according
                               to taste
                            ?hteaspoon salt


Blend ingredients well.
Place in paper cups or popsicle molds and freeze.
For real ice cream texture, this mixture may be placed in an ice
cream maker.
Adjust amounts of ingredients depending upon the volume of
your machine.
If you have an ice cream maker which calls for crushed ice, you
can avoid having to crush the ice by doing the following:
In the space in which the crushed ice is to be placed, pour 1 cup
of cold water.
Measure about 2 cups of ordinary salt and make layers of ice
cubes, alternating with salt, until the space is filled. Use all the
salt by the time you reach the top.
It is wise to have available plenty of ice cubes; save up the
equivalent of about 6 trays before starting.
Pour another cup of cold water around the top of the cubes. Start
up the motor of the ice cream maker; it should be done in less
than an hour.
Variation: Add 1 or 2 raw eggs to the mixture for a creamier
texture.
                        Goumet Section


                 Instant Blender Ice Cream
  2 cups homemade yoghurt
  I quartJi-ozenflit
    fstruwbm'es, raspbem'es, sliced peaches, bluebem'es)
  Note: Do not thawflit!
  honey to sweeten
Place '/z cup yoghurt in blender.
Gradually add frozen fruit and the remaining yoghurt alternately.
Add honey to taste.
Blend until thick.
Store in freezer until ready to eat.
This ice cream is thick and smooth and should be eaten soon
after making.
If it is refrozen, it will crystallize.

Variation: Freeze yoghurt in ice cube tray and in blender mix
the frozen yoghurt cubes with pineapple juice or frozen orange
juice (or a mixture of both juices). Use about 6 yoghurt ice cubes
and '/z CUP juice adding small amounts of juice to obtain a thick
consistency.
                    White Bean Ice Cream
  2 cups cooked white              4 large eggs
     beans (well drained)          ?4 teaspoon salt
  3 cups homemade yoghurt          2 tablespoons vanilla
  2 cup honey

Beat eggs, honey, and salt together in top of double boiler.
Place over boiling water and cook until thick, stirring constantly.
Set aside while you prepare the rest of the ingredients.
Place % cup of yoghurt in bottom of blender.
Add beans, one cup at a time, and process until very smooth.
Add % CUP of yoghurt and blend well.
Pour into a very large bowl, add remaining 2 cups of yoghurt.
With electric beater running, add custard mixture slowly beating
constantly.
Add vanilla and mix well.
Place in freezer and a s the mixture freezes at the sides of the
container, mix with unfrozen part. This should be repeated a few
times until the ice cream is completely frozen.
This mixture can be placed in a commercial ice cream maker of
any type instead of freezing in the freezer.

Variations:
1. When ice cream is beginning to thicken, stir in '/z cup apple
   butter.
2. Mashed or pureed banana, peaches, pineapple, strawberries
   can be folded in as mixture freezes.

(Recipe courtesy of Lois Lang)
                       Gourmet Section


                Pineapple Cheese Dessert
  I envelope unflavored          I teaspoon lemonjuice
      gelatin                    % teaspoon lemon rind,
   '/s cup cold water              grated
  2 beaten eggyolks              % cup uncreamed cottage
  2 shmy beaten egg                cheese (@ curd)
       whites                    ?G CUP honey
  !h cup unsweetened            dash ofsalt
       cnrshed pineapple
Soften gelatin in cold water.
Combine egg yolks, pineapple, lemon juice, lemon rind, honey,
and salt, Cook over hot water until thick.
Add gelatin and stir until dissolved.
Remove from heat, add cheese.
Chill until set.
Fold in stiffly beaten egg whites.
Spoon into individual molds and return to refrigerator.
                        Lemon Souffle
  1 tablespoon melted butter       3 eggs
  r/z cup honey                   juice oJ r lemon
  % cup almondflour                1 cup homemade yoghurt

Separate egg whites and beat until stiff.
Beat egg yolks.
Add butter, honey, almond flour, and lemon juice to egg yolks
and mix well.
Stir in yoghurt.
Fold egg whites into mixture.
Pour into greased souffle dish or deep baking dish.
Set in a pan of water and bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 30
minutes.
Souffle is done when an inserted knife comes out clean.



                      Raspberry Mousse
  2 cups homemadeyoghurt           4 cupscfi-esh raspbem'es
  2 envelopes unflavored               (2 cups pureed)
    gelatin                        r/z cup honey
  3 eggs separated

In the top of a double boiler, blend egg yolks, pureed raspberries,
honey, and yoghurt.
Heat over boiling water, stirring constantly until hot.
Place gelatin in '/2 cup cold water for a few minutes to soften.
When raspberry mixture is hot, add softened gelatin and mix
thoroughly.
Remove from heat and chill until mixture starts to set.
Whip egg whites to stiff peaks and fold into raspberry mixture.
Chill until firm and serve with remaining raspberries arranged
around the mousse.
(Recipe courtesy of David J. Couture)
(Submitted by Barbara Scheuer)
                         Gourmet Section


                Raspberry Mousse Angel Pie
Meringue Crust:
 3 large e&g whites, at             ?4cup honey
    room temperature                .'/Z teaspoon vanilla
 l/s teaspoon salt                     extract
Preheat oven to 275" F.
Lightly oil a 9" pie plate and set aside.
In a large mixing bowl, combine egg whites and salt.
Beat until soft peaks form.
Add half of the honey and beat for 30 seconds.
Gradually beat in the remaining honey.
Add vanilla and beat until all the honey is dissolved and the
meringue is stiff and shiny.
Spread the meringue over the bottom and sides of the oiled pie
plate.
Using the back of a spoon, spread some meringue up to the rim,
forming a decorative edge.
Or, using a piping bag fitted with a star tip, pipe the meringue
into the pie plate.
Bake for about 1 hour and 15 minutes or until firm and crisp.
Cool on a wire rack. (The meringue crust can be prepared ahead
and stored, covered, in an airtight container for up to one week.)
Raspberry Mousse Filling;
 I package (I2 02.)                 I !h tablespoonsfi-esh
    fi-ozen, unsweetened               lemonjuice
     raspbem'es, thawed             '/Z CUP honey
     (3CUPS)                        ?4 teaspoon salt
 2 tablespoons (2envelopes)         '/Z teaspoon vanilla
     mfzavored gelatin                 extract
  ?4 cup orangejuice or             1% CUPS homemade
     apple cider                     yoghurt
                                    Mint sprigsJor garnish
Set aside a few raspberries in refrigerator for garnish.
In a food processor or blender, puree the remaining raspberries
and their juice.
If desired, strain the pureed raspberries through a fine strainer to
remove seeds.
Set aside.
In a small saucepan, sprinkle gelatin over 'h cup cold water.
Let stand for about 3 minutes to soften.
Stir in orange juice or apple cider and lemon juice.
Heat over low heat stirring for 1-3 minutes or until gelatin is dis-
solved.
Add the raspberry puree, honey and salt.
Increase heat to medium and cook, stirring for 3-4 minutes or
until honey dissolves.
Remove from heat and add vanilla extract.
Pour the raspberry mixture into a heatproof bowl and set over a
larger pan of ice water.
Stir gently for 10-20 minutes or until the mixture thickens to the
consistency of raw egg whites.
Whisk in yoghurt.
Pour into cooled meringue crust.
Cover loosely with plastic and refrigerate until set for at least 3
hours or for up to 8 hours.
Garnish with reserved raspberries and mint sprigs.
Serves 10

(Recipe courtesy of Carol Clark and adapted from Susan G.
Purdy's recipe published in Eating Well magazine, Mayljune
1992.
Submitted by Barbara Scheuer)
                         Gourmet Section



                        Orange Mousse
  2 cups homemadeyoghurt            6 tablespoonspozen
  2 envelopes unflvored                orangejuice
    gelatin                            concentrate
  3 eggs, separated                 ?b CUP honey (more or
  2 oranges (optional)                 less as desired)
Peel oranges removing as much of the white membrane as possi-
ble. Remove seeds and section oranges. Cut each section in half
and set aside.
Beat egg yolks thoroughly with a fork, and pour into the top of a
double boiler or saucepan.
Blend '/z cup of yoghurt and frozen orange juice concentrate with
the egg yolks.
If using saucepan, place mixture over low heat and stir until hot.
If using double boiler, place mixture over boiling water and stir
until hot.
Add honey and stir thoroughly.
Place contents of two envelopes of gelatin in '/z cup cold water for
a few minutes to soften.
Add softened gelatin to hot mixture, stirring constantly for a few
minutes. Remove from heat.
Add enough yoghurt to increase volume of mixture to 3-4 cups.
Mix thoroughly.

Note: For each envelope of gelatin, do not exceed two cups of
mixture. Place in refrigerator until mixture begins to set. This
should take about 1 hour.
Beat egg whites until stiff.
Fold orange sections into beaten egg whites.
Fold orange-egg white mixture into gelatin mixture.
Return to refrigerator until gelatinized completely.

Variations: Other fruits may be used: canned, unsweetened
crushed pineapple, pureed strawberries, apricots or peaches.
(Recipe courtesy of Nancy Marcellus)
                        Pumpkin Pie
The Almond honey crisp recipe (see pg. 132) may be used as a
crust or this recipe may be made without a crust and eaten as a
custard or pudding.
Filling:                          Spices:
  3 eggs, beaten                  2 teaspoons cinnamon,
  1 cup homemadeyoghurt              1 teaspoon nutmeg,
      or uncreamed cottage           ?bteaspoon ground
      cheese ( d y curd)             cloves.
      pureed                         Spices may be van'ed
  ?b cup honey                       according to preference.
  2 cups ofpepared squash
      or pumpkin (canned
      not permitted) f
All ingredients should be mixed thoroughly. This may be done in
a large mixing bowl using a beater, in a blender, or in a food
processor. Because of the large volume, it is advised that only
part of the ingredients be placed in the processor or blender at
one time to avoid overflow.
Pour into a large pie pan or two smaller ones.
Bake at 375°F (190°C) or until a knife comes out clean.
May be served warm or cold.
?To prepare squash or pumpkin:
Use winter squash (hubbard, acorn, or butternut).
Remove seeds and steam, boil, or bake until tender.
Scoop out insides discarding skin. Drain.
A large pumpkin may be baked or cooked until tender in the
same way as the squash.
Place pumpkin in a bowl and let stand to drain.
Scoop out insides.
Freeze what is not used.
150                     Gourmet Section



                 SWEET TREATS, TAM

                         Candied Nuts
  I lb. nuts (almonds,             2 e~ whites
    walnuts, pecans,               1 / 2 4 cup honey depending
    hazelnuts) shelled                upon desired sweetness
  $hazelnuts are used, rub         % cup melted butter
    in towel to remove             pinch oJsalt
    skins.                         pinch of cinnamon
Place nuts on large shallow pan and toast in oven at 300°F
(150°C)for 10 minutes.
Cool.
Beat egg whites with salt until peaks form.
Gradually add honey and continue beating until honey and egg
whites are thoroughly mixed.
Fold in nuts and cinnamon.
Coat the large shallow pan with melted butter.
Spread nut and egg white mixture over buttered pan.
Bake in oven at 300°F (150°C) for 30 minutes turning nuts every
10 minutes until butter disappears.
Let cool in pan.
Cut or break into bite-size pieces and store in covered container.
(Recipe courtesy of Judy Newman)
                       Granola Chews
  I / q - % cup butter           I cup coarsely chopped
  '/Z cup honey                      nuts (almonds)pecans,
  '/Z cup raisins                    or walnuts)
  '/Z cup unsweetened)           '/Z teaspoon salt
    grated coconut
In a saucepan, stir butter and honey over low heat until melted
and blended.
Remove from heat and add remaining ingredients, combining
well.
Spread mixture in an ungreased square 8 inch baking pan.
Bake at 350°F (180°C) for about 25 minutes until set.
Cool, cut in squares.


          Quick, Uncooked Coconut Ball Candy
  I cup liquid honey
  '/Z cup unsweetened)grated coconut
  '/Z cup chopped nuts

Blend ingredients and roll into balls using buttered hands (to
prevent mixture from sticking to hands).
Balls may be rolled in chopped nuts.
152                      Gourmet Section


                      Vanilla Candy
  % cup water                  1 teaspoon vanilla extract
  1 lb. honey (about 2 cups)      (more, jf desired)
  1 teaspoon vinegar           2 tablespoons butter
                               crushed nuts (optional)
Heat honey with vinegar and water in a large pot.
Allow to boil gently until a soft ball forms when dropped into
cold water.
Remove from heat and add vanilla extract and butter.
Mix thoroughly with a spoon.
If nuts are to be used, add nuts to honey mixture.
Pour into a flat, buttered metal pan and cool.
Place in freezer until hard. Only then can it be cracked into small
bite-size pieces.
Remove pan from freezer; place it on a board. Using a clean
screw driver as a wedge, crack candy in several places by hitting
screw driver handle with a hammer.
Return to freezer to store.
This recipe may be used for making nut logs as follows:
Use 1-2 cups pecan or walnut halves.
When honey mixture is ready to remove from heat, add nuts,
butter, and vanilla and mix thoroughly.
Cool nut-honey mixture and spoon onto wax paper (doubled in
thickness).
Roll into logs and refrigerate.
Slice as needed.
                           Lolly Pops
Have available small clean sticks; may be purchased in hardware
store. Follow the recipe for vanilla candy by heating honey, vine-
gar and water in a large pot.
Allow to boil gently until aJrm ball forms when dropped into
cold water.
Remove from heat and add vanilla extract but no butter.
Place sticks about 4 inches apart on a greased cookie sheet and
pour approximately 2 tablespoons of hot mixture at the top of
each stick allowing mixture to cover about '/z inch of the top of
the stick.
When the candy has hardened, remove lolly pops and wrap
separately.

Variation: Flavorings such as anise or cinnamon may be added
with the vanilla.

                     Becky's Magic Toffee
This recipe is a variation of the vanilla candy recipe.

  r/z cup water                     I tablespoon vanilla
  1 lb. honey                          extract
  I teaspoon vinegar                r tablespoon baking soda
Heat honey, vinegar, and water in a large pot.
Allow to boil gently until aJrm ball forms when dropped into
cold water.
Remove from heat, place pot in sink, add vanilla extract and
baking soda.
Stir briskly but only until baking soda is thoroughly blended in
and toffee mixture foams up.
When the foaming begins to subside, pour into a well-buttered
pan and cool.
When candy is@        enough, it may be cut into bite size pieces
using kitchen shears or cracked with a blunt instrument.

Variation: When candy has cooled enough to handle, it can be
pulled like taffy and then cut into pieces. Children will enjoy the
taffy pull.                     (Recipe courtesy of Becky Smith)
                        Gourmet Section




Jams can be made with many different fruits: strawberries,
raspberries, peaches, apricots, black currants, or a combination
of these.
Commercial pectin is not to be used.
To make jam, add ?hcup honey for each quart of prepared fruit.
Add the smallest amount of water possible to simmer the jam
and keep it from sticking and burning at the beginning of
cooking.
Stir until ingredients are well blended, then simmer, stirring
occasionally to prevent sticking.
As jam becomes thicker, stir more often to prevent scorching.
The jam is done when it becomes thick and forms droplets on the
edge of a spoon.
The cooking process should take from 1-1 ?h hours depending
on the amount of water to be evaporated.
The jam may not be as thick as ordinary jam. Do not risk scorch-
ing it to get it thicker.
Place small amounts in clean containers and freeze. Thaw as
needed.
                        BEVERAGES

                          Almond Milk
  I ?hCUPS ground almonds
  3 cups water
  I tablespoon honqy (optional)
Combine and blend for several minutes in a blender. Drain
through a colander lined with a cheese cloth


                          Milk Shakes
For 1 cup:
  r/z cup homemade yoghurt
  r/z cup3esh orfiozenJiuit, such as strawbem'es,
      peaches, raspbemks, bananas, bluebemes.f
Place yoghurt in blender and then add fruit.
Sweeten to taste with a little honey or saccharin.
Blend until thick and creamy.
tIf fresh fruit is used, add a few ice cubes to chill drink.


                      Fruit Juice Spritzer
                    (Replacement for pop)
Combine fruit juice-f with Perrier water or club soda and ice to
make a nutritious, "fizzy" drink.
tNaturally sweetened juices suitable for this recipe are apple
cider, orange, grapefruit, pineapple, and grape.
                        Gourmet Section


                        Party Punch?
  I large can unsweetened pineapple juice
  about I quart of orangejuice, notporn concentrate
Mix juices in punch bowl, add ice cubes.
Float fruit slices or berries on top.
?Keep a bowl of punch available, especially in warm weather, to
avoid the temptation of beverages that are not permitted. Make
sure punch bowl is sturdy.


                         Piiia Colada
  unsweetened canned pineapplejuice
  ice cubes
Fill blender no more than half full with unsweetened pineapple
juice. Add no more than 4 or 5 ice cubes.t
Run blender for about 45 seconds until drink is frothy and
creamy.
Serve at once.
?If sherbet is desired, rather than a drink, add about 10 ice
cubes.
MILK PREPARATIONS AND INFANT FORMULA

                             YOGHURT
     Yoghurt is one of the oldest foods known to man. Wherever peo-
ple milked cows, goats, mares, sheep, or camels, a product similar to
yoghurt was eaten. Kefx, Kumiss, fermented acidophilus milk, and
Bulgarian milk are all similar to yoghurt, differing only in the kinds of
microbes introduced into the milk.
     If milk is left unrefrigerated in a warm environment, many types
of microbes (bacteria and yeast) in the air, as well as some remaining
in the milk, even after Pasteurization, start multiplying and using the
milk sugar, lactose, as a source of energy. The result is soured milk
which often has a bitter, unpleasant taste and consistency. In making
yoghurt, this process is controlled by getting rid of the mixture of
microbes and introducing only those which produce the tart and tasty
product you desire.
     You may use powdered, skim, 296, or whole milk. If you use
powdered milk, add only the amount of powder which you would
use to make regular fluid milk. Do not add additional milk powder
to fluid milk in order to get a thicker yoghurt or more protein as
you will not get a "true" yoghurt and it will be detrimental to
those on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet.
     Whole milk makes a very tasty yoghurt but if you are elimi-
nating fat for a particular reason, you may use low fat milk. If you
do, you must be careful while heating as it scorches more readily
than whole milk.
INSTRUCTIONS
1. Bring one quart (or liter) milk to the simmer stage and
   remove from heat. Stir often to prevent scorching and stick-
   ing to the bottom of the pan.
2. Cover and cool until it has reached room temperature or
   below (may be placed in refrigerator to hasten cooling). It is
   very important that you allow the temperature to drop suffi-
   ciently or you will kill the bacterial culture you are now ready
   to introduce.
3. Remove about one-half cup cooled milk and make a paste
   with one-quarter cup of good quality commercial yoghurt.
   The commercial yoghurt you use should be unflavored and
   unsweetened. Buy one containing only milk or milk solids
   and bacterial culture, if possible. It is usually unnecessary to
   buy yoghurt culture separately since commercial yoghurt is
   very satisfactory to use as a "starter". If you find it impossi-
   ble to buy commercial yoghurt which contains only milk and
   bacterial culture, then you are advised to buy yoghurt culture
   ("starter") separately. After removing what is needed, return
   the container of commercial yoghurt to the coldest part of the
   refrigerator for use as a starter in the next batch of home-
   made yoghurt.
        Saving some yoghurt from a previous batch of home-
   made yoghurt to start a new batch is not as satisfactory as
   using commercial yoghurt as a "starter" each time.
   Manufacturers of commercial yoghurt make every effort to
   use "lively" bacterial strains and extremely large numbers of
   bacteria in the manufacturing process. The conditions of
   home refrigeration most often do not promote the survival of
   yoghurt bacteria to the same degree as the conditions main-
   tained by the commercial yoghurt producers. Homemade
   yoghurt, made by using some of the the last batch as a
   "starter", often fails to solidify (coagulate) properly due to
   insufficient quantities of live bacteria.
4. Mix the paste with the remainder of the cooled milk and stir
   thoroughly.
5. Pour milk into any appropriately-sized container, cover, and
   let stand for at least 24 hours at 100"-110°F (38-43°C). (If
   you forget to remove it after 24 hours, and the fermentation
   goes on longer, all the better.) Under no circumstances
   should the fermentation time be decreased to less than 24
   hours. This fermentation time should supersede any other
   instructions which may accompany a commercial yoghurt
   maker.
       The source of heat used during the 24-hour fermentation
   is critical. It is very important to get the temperature correct
   at 100"-110°F (38-43°C) before you proceed with the fer-
   mentation. Too high a temperature will kill the bacterial cul-
   ture and will prevent the proper "digestion" (conversion) of
   the lactose. Too low a temperature will prevent activation of
    bacterial enzymes and will result in incomplete "digestion" of
    the lactose.
        A thermos-type yoghurt maker may not be satisfactory
    for this long fermentation period as the hot water surround-
    ing the thermos will not stay warm. The electric commercial
    yoghurt makers control the temperature perfectly but the
    amount of yoghurt that can be made at one time is limited.
    An ideal source of heat is a large electric warming tray. If it
    has a temperature-regulating dial, use a thermometer to set
    the dial properly. A mouth thermometer is adequate. If the
    warming tray does not have a dial to control the temperature,
    cover the surface of the tray with a thickness of metal (such
    as a metal cake rack) or fire-resistant material (such as a
    teflon-treated ironing board cover) and allow the tray to
    remain on for about five minutes before placing the ther-
    mometer on the surface to determine the temperature. If too
    warm, use a thicker piece of metal or material. By using the
    large surface of the electric warming tray, a gallon of yoghurt
    can be made at one time in two, plastic or ceramic, half-gal-
    lon containers. An electric crock pot set to low, or a heating
    pad, both checked for temperature, may be used.
        Some people use their ovens; the pilot in a gas oven usu-
   ally keeps the temperature in the oven within the correct
   range. If using the oven of an electric stove, change the oven
   light to a 60-watt bulb. Turning on the oven light (with a 60-
   watt bulb) should create enough warmth to make yoghurt;
   always check the temperature with a thermometer first.
   Sometimes the oven door must be propped ajar with a little
   stick to achieve the correct temperature range.
   Caution: Upon completion of yoghurt fermentation, replace
   regular oven bulb.
6. Allow the yoghurt to remain on the heat for a minimum of 24
   hours to ensure that all lactose is completely "digested".
   Remove from heat gently and refrigerate.
        While this yoghurt may not be as thick as commercial
   yoghurt, it will be a true yoghurt since virtually all of the lactose
   has been digested by the bacterial culture and further lactose
   digestion will not be required by intestinal cells.
                         Gourmet Section



                              NOTE
See INTERNET SECTION for mailorder yoghurt makers and
cultures.



                         Cream Cheese
1 Line a colander with a clean cloth (a dish towel is satisfactory).
2. Place colander on a bowl.
3. Pour chilled yoghurt into lined colander and allow to drain for
    about 6-8 hours (need not be refrigerated while draining).
4 . Lift cloth by two opposite ends, place on flat surface, and
   with a spatula, scrape "cream cheese" off and refrigerate. It
   will be quite tart; a little liquid honey may be worked in with
   a spatula to sweeten.



                         French Cream

  2 cups cream                      ?b cup commercialyoghurt
     (table cream, hag-and-            (seeyoghurt recipefor
     hag or heavy cream)               type to use)
Bring cream to simmer stage stirring often as it heats.
Cool cream and follow recipe for homemade yoghurt.
Allow cream to ferment for 24-48 hours.
Refrigerate.
For a creamy rich ice cream, use in ice cream recipe instead of
yoghurt or use part yoghurt and part French cream. May also be
used as a topping for desserts.
       INFANT FORMULA - DISACCHARIDE FREE
      This formula may be used for short periods of time until the
physician can prescribe a formula which contains no disaccha-
rides. Some commercial formulas, recommended for diarrhea, con-
tain considerable amounts of corn syrup (containing maltose and
isomaltose). As a result, some babies with severe diarrhea do not
recover when they are used1. Check newer formulations as they
appear on the commercial market to ensure they are disaccharide-
free.
      The following formula (about 2 cups) contains approximately
90 mg calcium, 175 mg phosphorous, 72 mg potassium, 0.40 mg
iron, 17 gm protein, 0.3 gm fat, and 2.7 gm carbohydrate.
      Babies one year and younger need approximately 500-700
mg calcium per day. An additional source of calcium would, there-
fore, be necessary if this formula is used more than a few days.
Please discuss this with your physician.
      The following ingredients should be used and enough water
added to bring the total up to about 2 cups (17 fluid oz or 500 rnl).
  3 tablespoons uncreamed cottage cheese (d?y curd)
     (2.2 oz or 33 gm)
  2 tablespoon unrefined saflower oil
     (0.7cfluid oz or 2 9 ml)
     It is preferable to purchase the oil already bottled. Health food
stores and some large supermarkets usually cany this item. Please
read the label carefully and make sure that there is no BHT or BHA
added. Addition of vitamin E, beta carotene, or vitamin A is all
right.
  2 tablespoons pasteurized honey (0.9Juid oz or 25 ml)

    Prior to the preparation of the formula, place the honey and
approximately 1 cup of the water in a pressure cooker and heat
keeping the honey-water mixture under pressure for 10 minutes.
This is to sterilize the honey and kill any microorganisms which
cannot be killed by ordinary heat.
    Place the dry curds in a blender with the oil.
    Blend until very smooth.
    Slowly add the honey-water mixture and blend until smooth.
162                      Gourmet Secton


     Bring total up to approximately 2 cups (17 fluid oz or 500 rnl)
with water.
     Place in a nursing bottle and make the hole in the nipple
slightly larger.
     This recipe may be doubled or tripled depending upon how
much the baby needs. Keep the unused portions refrigerated and
covered. Use within 24 hours after preparation.
     The formula contains the following:
     Total protein, mainly casein                     1.1%
     Total carbohydrate                              5.0%
     Total fat                                       3.8%
     These proportions are comparable to breast milk with the
exception of the carbohydrate. Breast milk contains 2% more
carbohydrate. However, the formula does not contain all the vita-
mins and minerals that are needed daily by the baby. The formula
may be tried, with your doctor's concurrence, for a limited period
for constipation or diarrhea. When the condition is alleviated,
return to the normal formula.
                        Addendum

         THE MOM AND DAD BRIGADE



       This section is dedicated to the memory of my hus-
band, Herbert Adrian Gottschall, who held me up when I
could no longer stand. Our daughter's words, written on
Father's Day, 1993, thirty years after we "knew" she was
cured, inspired me to add this section to the book.



  Dear Dad,
          I remember you running along School Lane,
  hanging on to the back of my two- wheeler, never letting
  go as 1 extracted promises by the second that you won't
  - and, finally I do it! I remember your driving me to
  horseback riding lessons every Sunday, your stopping at
  the gas station so I could throw upfromflght, butyour
  still urging me to go on andjust adoring those lessons.
          I remember your calm strength through terrible
  times when Mom could not muster one more ounce of
  courage through my illness but you had me convinced
  that I would get better. And I did!
          I remember a lot more too because you were a
  wonderful Dad. You taught me how to cherish my kids
  becauseyou did us.


       Forty-five years ago my own child was diagnosed a s
having an incurable disease, ulcerative colitis. This book is
a testament of our family's journey from hopelessness, help-
lessness, and isolation to a return of not only health for my
164                      Addendum



child, but a desire to prevent needless suffering of other
families.
        Will the feeling of, "I must talk to someone who
understands," ever leave me? During the years of her
illness, each time I heard of someone else with inflammato-
ry bowel problems, the strong urge to communicate over-
powered me. I would call strangers anywhere in the world
just to talk a n d seek some measure of understanding a n d
consolation.
        It h a s become apparent to me that, a s important a s
scientific information h a s been to bring about recovery in
our children, the support of spouses, friends, and others is
not only beneficial but also essential. Those who have bat-
tled the stor111 of bowel disease with their own loved ones
can give confidence and a large measure of reassurance to
those just entering the fray.
        The Addendum of this book is a record of some of the
inspiring and compassionate support offered by parents to
others a s they embark on the Specific Carbohydrate commit-
ment. Most of this help w a s given via the Listserv* on the
Internet. These parents have allowed me to include their
words in this supplement to Breaking the Vicious Cycle.

* A group of over 600 people supporting each other on the
Internet. Information pertinent to the SCD (Specific
Carbohydrate Diet) is shared. The Listserv was started by
Rachel Turet after her recovery from ulcerative colitis.


From Cindy
           Hi! Three months ago my 7-year old started having
   stomach pains from bad gas and bloating (his stomach
   gets really hard and distended). We started with a GI spe-
   cialist who put him through a ton of tests that have shown
   nothing so far. A month into this, he also started moving
   his head from side to side and bending a t the waist. He
   didn't do this all the time, but eating and exercise started
   the movements. The gas seems to be a trigger for every-
   thing going wacky. He had a hard time holding his head up
   after eating a bagel and was put in the hospital for three
                   The Mom and Dad Bngade                     16 5



   days, undergoing a ton of neurological tests that all came
   back negative.
           I read about Breaking the Vicious CycIe at Amazon.com
   and ordered it. At this time we are all devastated here as
   we are dealing with something that no one has even diag-
   nosed as of yet. I really think this started with gastrointesti-
   nal problems and everything is related. When I read this
   book I started crying uncontrollably because I know I have to
   do it and it seems so daunting.But I know I have to if the diet
   can take away the unbelievable gas and bloating and, maybe,
   some of the neurological symptoms.
           I want to know if there is anyone else out there who
   has experienced bending and tilting of the head (my son
   tells me this makes his stomach feel better) and also if
   there are any yummy recipes a 7-year old would like.
           This is going to be tough for him and all of us. My
   husband and I are doing it too, for the support we can give
   him. I know we have to do this, but it is so scary to a Mom
   who isn't a good cook and never aspired to be. Any words
   of encouragement will be so much appreciated.
   Thanks, Cindy.
The following emails followed within minutes of Cindy's
request.
From Lisa D.
           Reading your letter brought back all the feelings we
   went through when our son became ill. It was such a hor-
   rible time and we just didn't know what to do. It was like
   every black cloud ever created was hovering over us.
   During the worst of our son's illness, I don't believe I ever
   slept. I spent countless hours sitting in my living room
   praying, crying, wondering, and feeling overwhelmed and
   defeated. I wondered how much longer my son could
   endure the ravages of this disease and what it was doing to
   his body (at this time he had not as yet been diagnosed
   with ulcerative colitis). When he was finally diagnosed,
   there was a feeling of elation for us for, at least, we knew
   what he had. It had a name! There was something we
   could do about it. However, no doctor, at this time, told us
   that drugs were a short time answer. After seven years of
166                       Addendum


   going through a series of drugs each time a drug failed to
   work, we found this diet.
           It was as if God opened up the Heavens! We now
   know that if my son stays with the diet sufficiently long,
   he will be well. I wondered at the time if I could manage it
   and now, after a year, I can tell you things become easier.
           All I can say is, give the diet a try, give yourself
   time, and don't beat yourself up over mistakes because you
   will make them. We all have. In the end it will give your
   child a wonderful gift and you will have given yourself a
   whole new sense of purpose. Please know that we will try to
   be as helpful as we can and do not be afraid to ask questions
   and voice your fears. Lisa D.
From Brenda:
           Cindy, I know you can do it. I have Crohn's and an
   ileostomy now. I've had Crohn's for 16 years and an
   ileostomy for 3 years. My son was showing signs of bowel
   problems so he was colonoscoped and subjected to other
   tests, which showed nothing. I put him on SCD (I'm on it too)
   and everything cleared up.
           He had a lot of gas pains in his stomach and his
   chest wall. He also had trouble keeping his feet still. In his
   own words at 10 years old, after putting him on the diet for
   about 2 weeks, he told me his feet didn't want to move
   anymore. That winter he excelled at school and also in
   indoor soccer as he was much more focused. After a while,
   his friends, our family and the teacher became very accus-
   tomed to his eating habits and it wasn't a big deal at all. In
   fact the neighborhood kids sure like those peanut butter
   cookies.
           As a Mom I can see that you will be surprised to
   find what you can do when your own kids are involved.
   I'm a single parent and my son is now 13. 1 do not want to
   see anybody go through that emergency surgery I went
   through to have my ileostomy. Hope this helps, Brenda
From Keri Klein:
          Cindy, you can do it! I didn't experience head bend-
   ing, but gas and distension were symptoms of mine before
                   The Mom and Dad Bngade                      167



   1 started on this diet. The gas is gone. The distension is
   much improved.
          People on the Listserv will respond and here are
   some ideas to try, after you follow the introductory diet in
   Breaking the Vicious Cycle. Remember, try one new food at
   a time at the beginning. Smoothies made from homemade
   yogurt, ripe banana, honey, strawberries. Peanut butter
   and honey spread on peeled apples. Cheese chips: grate
   cheddar cheese. Melt small piles in skillet until crispy and flip
   and cook the other side, then cool until hard.
          There are so many great recipes for cakes and
   desserts in Breaking the Vicious Cycle and Lucy's
   Cookbook. And don't forget you can make him frozen
   yogurt treats by pouring smoothies into popsicle molds
   and freezing. Good luck, Keri
From Katie:
            Hi, Cindy. A lot of people believe that intestinal
   problems cause a lot of other weird problems. I am sure
   that this diet is worth a try. I never thought I could follow
   it, as I was a total pizza and junk food addict. I was also
   deathly ill from Crohn's and have three little kids, five
   years old and under, so I had to do it. Now six months
   later, I am rniraculously i11remission and feeling wonderful
   for the first time in 25 years (I am now 35).
            I love this diet. I wouldn't have believed that before.
   There are so many wonderful substitutes for most foods.
   The nut flour baking is wonderful and is extremely
   healthy. The most important thing is to never let your son
   get hungry. You know how hard it is to resist temptation
   when you are hungry. Always keep plenty of snacks avail-
   able, and here are some, which we find especially good:
            Peanut butter cake, monster cookies, cinnamon
   cookies from Lucy's Cookbook, coconut cookies, maca-
   roons, frozen yogurt, cashew peanut butter, the ~nuffins
   from BTVC, frozen juice pops.
            I am sure some of the Inoms will write you with
   their favorites. Oh, one more: cheese fries made out of
   fried Monterey jack cheese sticks, It does seem hard at
   first, but it really seems easy after a while. It just becomes
   a habit. Good luck. Katie
168                       Addendum


And another email of encouragement from Pam Williams
          Your anxiety and love for your son came through
  loud and clear in your posting on the SCD list. The diet
  looks daunting, we know, especially for someone who
  doesn't love cooking. As another uninspired cook, let me
   share how SCD can change the way you think about food.
          The hardest part is getting started. Many SCDers
   said to themselves, "I'll try it for a month and see how it
  goes." If your son is like hundreds of people on this list,
  he'll start to feel better within that month. You'll start to
  appreciate that what goes in his mouth contributes to his
  well being and health, and that diet is a natural, ancient
  way to nurture the people you love and positively affect
  their well being.
          Before SCD, I would go completely blank in a super-
  market when faced with all the options and absolutely no
   inspiration to cook them. On the SCD, I went from eating
  whatever was easy and handy to feeling all proud and nur-
  turing when my yogurt came out soft and snugly. Food
  changes from a chore to a healthy, natural tool to get back
   some control in a situation that seems out of control and out
  of your hands.
  With love, Pam.

And from Donna Bauchner, Brett's Mom
          Just to re-introduce myself. I'm the Mother of a fif-
  teen year-old, Brett, who has been on the SCD for about
  ten months. Brett has Crohn's, but thanks to SCD has been
  living life like any other teenager: school, going out with
   friends, playing baseball, lifting weights, marching in the
   school band, and, generally, having a wonderful life.
          Brett decided to share his success on the SCD with
   others and has posted information about SCD on various
  websites for inflammatory bowel disease sufferers. The
   response that he has received has been wonderful. So far,
   he has directed several people to the Listserv. Of course
   Brett did hear from one skeptic who attacked Brett's
   endorsement of SCD with a vengeance! Brett didn't let the
   doubter get to him and yesterday felt so good when he was
                  The Mom and Dad Bngade                  169



   able to talk about diet and Crohn's with two distraught
   parents whose teenagers are very ill.
           They sounded as crazed a s I was when Brett was
   first diagnosed, and they seemed eager to investigate the
   SCD further. I am so proud of my son and just wanted to let
   you know how important it is to try the diet for your son.
   Donna
And from Martha
          I'm Jonathan's mom. I've been swamped with activ-
  ity lately and haven't been able to write but I want you to
  know that I am thinking of you.
          Jonathan is 10 and was diagnosed with Crohn's dis-
  ease two years ago. We started the diet about then on our
  naturopathic doctor's advice. I know that the beginning
  may seem rough, but now, one year later, my SCD (Specific
  Carbohydrate Diet) family of five is all thriving and I am
  cooking with ease. The cup can be viewed a s half full;
  think of the frontier women without supermarkets, elec-
  tricity and appliances (that sounds like my Grandma's life
  with a lot more children to cook for).
           Several people on the list wrote to me with sugges-
  tions on how to get through the first few parties. You can
  bring substitute food for your son such a s homemade
  pizza, legal cake, etc. At this point, however, my son sim-
  ply accepts that he will not be eating all that other stuff
  without any expressed negative emotion. You will get there
  too, once you witness how the diet makes everyone feel
  better.
  Good luck, you are on the right path. Martha
From Lisa Ercolano:
           Your post about how much Danny is suffering
   brought tears to my eyes! My daughter, Olivia, is 11 (and
   has Crohn's disease) and she, too, had lost weight due to
   the disease and its symptoms.
           But good news, though. She has gained 4-1/2
   pounds in the three-plus weeks that she has been eating
   the Specific Carbohydrate Diet. There is no question that it
   may seem difficult at first. We had not yet realized how
   easy it is to get the few substituted ingredients. However,
170                       Addendum



   within a week, we had stocked our fridge with all kinds of
   fruits and vegetables; I bought legal canned fruits and made
   "cocktails" of the different kinds, and finally got going with
   the homemade yogurt.
           I know your son is not as old as my daughter, so it
   is probably a little more difficult to explain to him the fact
   that eating only healthy foods will help him get well. But if
   you do the hard thing - to get rid of anything in your cup-
   boards that is not SCD, he will eat the goodies you make,
   he really will. He will also quickly learn that he feels better
   when he eats these things so he will want to eat more. I
   have found that eating this diet with Olivia helps her to
   accept it. It is how the rest of us show support for her and
   belief in the diet.
           I know from first hand experience how painful it is
   to see one's child wasting away. But all I can do is reassure
   you that this way of eating WORKS.
           Hang in there. Eat SCD yourself. Let Danny bake
   and cook with you if he feels up to it. Your boy will be
   bouncing back in no time is my guess. It wouldn't hurt to
   do something nice for yourself like a hot bubble bath and
   good book when he is in bed. You are under a lot of stress.
From Patty
            I just had to chime in here. My daughter, Tabitha,
   just turned 7, has Crohn's disease. She has been suffering
   from this monstrous thing since she was at least 4 years
   old. She would tell you the diet is definitely worth it. In
   fact, she was just telling me earlier, "my tummy doesn't
   hurt any more since I have been on the diet."
            Before we found the diet, my precious baby only
   weighed 32 pounds. That is very small for, at that time,
   she was 6 years old. She had a mean fistula in her rectum.
   I watched with horror a s my sweet Tabitha bled into the
   toilet time after time. Just thinking about the torture of it
   all gives me a very queasy feeling. My heart ached for her,
   as she was unable to play and at times too weak to even
   get out of bed. I started her on the diet about a month ago,
   and she is very glad that I did. I have complete control over
   what she eats because I homeschool her. I keep a food and
   weight diary and record her symptoms daily. After all that
                  The Mom and Dad Bngade                   171



   we have been through, I waxlt to give the diet an honest
   chance and keep a careful record to elirnixlate all doubts.
           A week or two before we started the diet, Tabitha's
   SED rate (test for inflammation) was 78. Two weeks after
   starting the diet, it was 5. She is symptoni free, weighs 44
   pounds and is bursting at the seams with energy. She
   plays every day now. A simple thing such a s playing is a
   big thing to me and to her.
           1 hope my email helps in some way to keep you
   focused. You may hit some rough patches from time to
   time, but I think you can stay on the road.

And from Krysia to the author
  Dear Mrs. Gottschall,
           My name is Krysia Morin and I am eleven years old.
  I am writing to tell you that without your helpful book I
  would not be the healthy girl that I am today.
           i started having bad stomach-aches when I was six
  and as the years went by the pain worsened until I could
   not sleep at night. We used a scale from one to ten to gauge
  the pain with ten being the worst. Sometimes the pain
   reached eight on the scale. My Mom took me to the doctor
   sewral times but all they did was take more tests. One
  doctor even said, "Wait until she is stunted before doing
  anything."
           hlorn kept going to the library and finally found
  your book and we decided to tly it out. Within a week the
  pain went down to three and sonietirr~csone. Within six
   months, the pain had totally stopped. I have been on the
   diet for three years and only when 1 eat forbidden foods
  will I get a stomach-ache.
           I want to thank you again for all the work and
   research that you put into your book and I will never forget
  what you have done for me.
           Yours truly, Krysia Morin

Isaiah's Story
            Isaiah is a 12 year old boy with regressive Autism.
    He was born perfectly normal, and actually progressed
    ahead of schedule. A series of ear infectiuns, oral antibi-
    otics, immunizatio~is,a ~ l dan exposure to the wild virus
172                      Addendum


  strain of chicken pox caused Isaiah to suffer a loss of lan-
  guage, eye contact, joint attention, behavioral self-modu-
  lation, and the general ability to verbally communicate his
  needs, problems, and pain. He developed a severe and per-
  sistent gastrointestinal overgrowth of yeast, alternating
  constipation and diarrhea, food allergies, seasonal aller-
  gies, autistic enterocolitis, and lymphoid hyperplasia. It
  was so painfully debilitating that it caused him to cry and
  scream, as he tried to find physically comfortable posi-
  tions. It also caused him to miss many days of school.
          Isaiah followed a strict casein and gluten free diet
  for the past six years, with variable and minor improve-
  ment. He continued to battle chronic yeast overgrowth,
  clostridia, alternating diarrhea and constipation, abdomi-
  nal pain, gas, and bloating. He failed to acquire social and
  language skills, to the degree it seemed he should. In ret-
  rospect, his tantrums, mood changes, and behavioral out-
  bursts, were all essentially related to his state of bowel
  function and discomfort.
          In a practice of treating well over 100 children with
  diagnoses of Autism Spectrum Disorders, I must say that
  despite rigorous implementation of the casein-free and
  gluten-free diet (or free from any identified IgG allergens),
  as well as informed supplementation, I have not seen chil-
  dren improve to the extent and in the fashion one would
  anticipate. These children cannot implant normal flora, or
  eradicate clostridia or yeast. Despite nearly heroic inter-
  ventions to correct these problems, and heal the gut, we
  see continuing deficiencies in nutrients, fatty acids, and
  amino acids, as well as on-going bowel problems.
          Since starting the Specific Carbohydrate Diet six
  months ago, Isaiah has demonstrated impressive progress.
  He has had a normal stool every day since the third day on
  the diet. On the one occasion that he was exposed to birth-
  day cake and ice cream, he developed diarrhea for two
  days, and cried the entire time. When he resumed the SCD,
  the diarrhea and crying stopped, and have not returned.
  Isaiah has made significant, rapid progress in developing
  more language skills. His sentence structure has become
  more complex, he utilizes appropriate pronouns, and
  engages in spontaneous conversation. He has developed
                   The Mom and Dad Bngade                  173



   an interest in football, forsaking more juvenile interests,
   such a s "Thomas the Tank Engine". He has become a
   champion speller. He has been included in the full-day,
   sixth-grade classroom, with supports. Last year, he spent
   50% of his school-time alone with an individual teacher,
   because he could not stop crying, and performing almost-
   constant obsessive-compulsive routines. He missed over
   50 days of school last year due to severe abdominal pain,
   crying, pacing, and screaming. Learning is difficult, at
   best, under those circumstances.
          With love, respect, and gratitude,Pamela J. Ferro

          Further details regarding Isaiah's Story may be
   found on the website: www.breakingtheviciouscyc1e.info.




        Some emails ask why something is considered a n
illegal food on the diet. Although the scientific ground rules
are given for practically every food eliminated, often individ-
uals want more detailed reasons. To answer every one of these
questions would be impossible. The inclusion or elimination of
certain foods is based on the clinical findings of Dr. Sidney
Valentine Haas's work as reported to the author in the 19701s,as
well as many years of research on the chemical structures of
certain molecules - work done by the author.
174                       Addendum



An outstanding email was sent in by Daphne to one of the
"questioning'correspondents.
           It sounds a s though you are having trouble with
   your friend's adherence to the diet. Can you help him
   understand that trying to analyze the contents of every
   item on SCD is a zero sum game? The nature of organic
   molecules is extremely complex. A glucose molecule alone
   contains 24 atoms in a complex three-dimensional struc-
   ture, and any given starch can contain thousands of simple
   sugars attached in a huge variety of configurations. Then
   there is the interaction of carbohydrates with heat, time,
   and other components of food. And there are so many fac-
   tors in how our bodies interact with foods - our bacterial
   ecosystems (1000's of different micro-organisms) , the
   many enzymes that break down foods, our microvilli, our
   cellular absorption. Most popular nutrition books break
   nutrition into three categories: carbohydrate, protein, and
   fat. But in reality, it is far more complex.
           The Specific Carbohydrate Diet should be consid-
   ered evidence-based medicine. We follow it because it
   works for many people. Period! If we try to tweak it to our
   hopes and wishes, you will get nowhere but very confused.
           Nutrition is still in the dark ages - about where pure
   chemistry was 150 years ago. The importance of vitamins
   was only recognized in the middle part of the twentieth
   century. Compound that with the massive influence of the
   food industry on science and medicine, and the fact that
   the chemical composition of foods is changing rapidly due
   to agritech, etc. And consider the difficulty of conducting
   clinical trials in nutrition because there are so many factors
   for which to control. And consider the fact that each scien-
   tist can only focus on one tiny piece of a huge puzzle.
           The Specific Carbohydrate Diet is a beacon of light
   in a black hole of misinformation as far as I am concerned.
   But until the time that teams of researchers and millions of
   dollar can be put into it, no one can answer your every
   question about "why".
        FOR THOSE ON THE INTERNET



       Since the last printing of Breaking the Vicious Cycle
additional websites and e-mail addresses have been placed
on the Internet.
(1) www.breakingtheviciouscy1e.info
   This is Elaine Gottschall's website. This site gives details
   to those wishing to know more about the Specific
   Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) including the latest News and
   Information, a beginner's guide, knowledge base and valu-
   able insights into the SCD. It also contains information on
   the listserves, how to join them and links to additional SCD
   resources.
(2) www.scdiet.org - The SCD Library
   This is an archive of testimonials, history of SCD,
   Frequently-Asked Questions, physician resources, new
   sources for some of the ingredients used in the diet, and
   many, many recipes.
   This site also links to other sites which are established in
   Danish, Finnish, German, and Spanish languages and
   additional North American sites in English.
(3) www.scdiet.com
   Book and video marketing relating to the Specific
   Carbohydrate Diet. Some videos are recordings of lectures
   given by the author at conferences andlor TV interviews;
   biographies of the scientists who developed the SCD, a s
   well as the complete first chapter of Breaking the Vicious
   Cycle.
2 76                       Internet


(4) www. scdkitchen. com
   Mail order kitchen shop where appliances (yogurt makers,
   ice cream makers), yogurt cultures, and other necessary
   ingredients for the SCD may be ordered. Books may also be
   ordered from this site.
   (More about this site later.)
(5) www. healingcrow.com
   Discussion on health issues with much information on the
   Specific Carbohydrate Diet. There is a special section called
   SCD Wisdom with detailed answers to questions by the
   author of Breaking the Vicious Cycle.
(6) www.scdrecipe.com
   Additional recipes for Specific Carbohydrate Diet as well as
   interesting and humorous comments by site managers.
(7) www.uclbs.org
   A valuable resource section, especially for those living in
   the Toronto, Ontario area. Some excellent recipes and pic-
   tures of Toronto potluck get-togethers. The new supple-
   ment to Breaking the Vicious CycIe (2002) can be read in
   its entirety.
(8) www.regimegs.com
   A French language website with information on the SCD
   and other topics relating to the diet.
                           GLOSSARY



Carbohydrates   various types of sugar, starch, and dietary fibers
Digestion       (1) the process of reducing large food molecules into
                     simpler compounds and, thereby, making it possi-
                     ble for them to be absorbed from the digestive tract
                     into the bloodstream
                (2) splitting food molecules
Disaccharides   sugars composed of two parts (two molecules) chemi-
                cally linked and which require digestion before they can
                be absorbed into the bloodstream
Disacchatidases a group of enzymes embedded within the membranes
                of the intestinal absorptive cells. These enzymes (lac-
                tase, sucrase, maltase, and isomaltase) digest (split)
                the double sugars lactose, sucrose, maltose, and isoma-
                ltose respectively
Enteropathy     an intestinal disease
Engmes          chemical compounds, made by cells, which are respon-
                sible for chemical reactions carried on by those cells
                the chemical breakdown of carbohydrates (sugars,
                starch, and fiber) by intestinal microbes resulting in the
                production of hydrogen gas, carbon dioxide gas, and
                various other products such as lactic acid, acetic acid
                and alcohol.
                (1) a monosaccharide sugar found in honey and fruits
                (2) one of the monosaccharide sugars released, along
                     with glucose, when sucrose is digested
                (3) a "predigested sugar
                various bacteria, yeast, and other microscopic forms of
                life in the intestinal contents
Galactose       a monosaccharide sugar released, along with glucose,
                when the milk sugar, lactose, is digested
Glucose          (1) a single sugar (see monosaccharides) found in
 (dextrose)          sources such as fruits and honey
                (2) a single sugar released, along with fructose, when
                     sucrose is digested
                             Glossary


                ( 3 ) a single sugar released, along with galactose, when
                    lactose is digested
                (4) the single sugars released when maltose and
                    isomaltose are digested
                (5) the type of sugar making up the starch molecule;
                     starch is a chain of glucose molecules
Lactase         an enzyme embedded within the membranes of intes-
                tinal cells (within the microvilli) which digests (splits)
                lactose into glucose and galactose
Lactose         (1) milk sugar
                (2) a disaccharide sugar composed of one part glucose
                     and one part galactose chemically linked
Lumen           interior space of intestine
Maltase         an enzyme embedded within the membranes of intes-
                tinal cells (within the microvilli) which digests (splits)
                maltose into two molecules of glucose
Isomaltase      an enzyme embedded within the membranes of intes-
                tinal cells (within the microvilli) which digests (splits)
                isomaltose into two molecules of glucose
Maltose         a disaccharide sugar composed of two molecules of glu-
                cose chemically linked; most of the maltose found in
                the intestinal tract is derived from starch which has
                undergone partial digestion
Isomaltose      a disaccharide sugar composed of two molecules of glu-
                cose chemically linked differently than maltose; most of
                the isomaltose found in the intestinal tract is derived
                from starch which has undergone partial digestion
Molecule        a substance containing two or more atoms. Example:
                water is a molecule which contains two atoms of hydro-
                gen and one atom of oxygen (H20).
                 (1) single sugars including glucose, fructose, and
                     galactose which require no further digestion in
                     order to be absorbed into the bloodstream
                 (2) "predigested sugars
Mucosa          the lining of the intestinal tract which is formed by the
 (intestinal)   intestinal cells and which comes in contact with the
                contents of the intestinal tract
Peristalsis     involuntary waves of muscular contraction and relax-
                ation which propel the contents of the intestine forward
                a class of carbohydrates consisting of many chemically
                linked sugar molecules; starch is the most familiar
                example
Putrefac~on      the chemical breakdown of proteins by intestinal
                 microbes resulting in the formation of ammonia and
                 other substances
ReJined Carbohydrate
                 a carbohydrate such as cornstarch or white sugar which
                 has been separated from substances with which it is
                 normally associated in the natural or whole state.
                 Refined carbohydrates usually have their calories left
                 intact but have lost most, if not all, of the fiber, vita-
                 mins, and minerals found in the whole foods from
                 which they have been extracted.
Starch           (1) a long chain of glucose molecules chemically linked
                     to each other
                 (2) one of the carbohydrates found throughout the
                     plant kingdom; grains and potatoes contain large
                     amounts of starch
                 (3) a polysaccharide
Sucrose          (1) a disaccharide sugar composed of one part glucose
                     and one part fructose chemically linked
                 (2) ordinary table sugar extracted from sugar cane or
                     sugar beets
Sucrase          an enzyme embedded within the membranes of the
                 intestinal cells (within the microvilli) which digests
                 (splits) sucrose into glucose and fructose
Sugars           chemical compounds of varying sweetness which
                 include fructose, glucose, isomaltose, lactose, maltose,
                 and sucrose
Villi            finger-like projections (forming hills and valleys)
                 which normally make up the absorptive surface of the
                 small intestine; they become flattened in various condi-
                 tions
 Microvilli      finger-like projections normally present on individual
                 intestinal absorptive cells; normally, digestive enzymes
                 are embedded within microvilli but, in many condi-
                 tions, microvilli disappear along with their digestive
                 enzymes
Vitamins         substances present in small amounts in natural food-
                 stuffs (or supplements) which are essential for cellular
                 function and the lack of which in the diet results in dis-
                 ease. The cells, with minor exceptions, cannot make
                 vitamins.
                                   APPENDIX

                            CHEESES
       Permitted cheeses are those which contain virtually
no lactose. In order for a cheese to be free of lactose, the
manufacturing process must include separation and removal
of the whey (containing most of the lactose) from the curd
as well a s a "curing" of the remaining lactose by the addition
of a bacterial culture.
       Cheeses Permitted            Cheeses Not Pemitted
use those in italicsffely;    Cottage Cheese (regular)
the others occasionally       Cream
Asiago                        Feta
Blue                          Gjetost
Brick                         Mozzarella (Pizza Cheese)
Brie                          Neufchatel
Camembert                     Primost
Cheddar, mild, medium, (sharp Ricotta
    cheddar - occasionallyI   Processed cheese slices or
colby                             spreads
Edam
Gorgonzola
Gouda
Gruyere
Havarti
Limburger
Monterey (Jack)
Muenster
Parmesan (if already grated, check to
ensure that there are no added milk solids)
Port du Salut
Roquefort
Romano
Stilton
Swiss
~ncreamedcottage cheese
   fdty curd)
     Amount of Sucrose Commonly Added to Foods
                                               Average percent
Food category                                       by weight

Baked goods, baking mixes
Breakfast cereals
Grain products, such as pasta or rice dishes
Processed cheeses
Frozen dairy desserts
Processed fruits, juices and drinks
Fruit ices, water ices
Processed meat products
Processed vegetables, juices
Condiments, relishes, salt substitutes
Soft candies
Jams, jellies, sweet spreads
Sweet sauces, toppings, syrups
Gelatin, puddings, fillings
Processed nut products
Gravies, sauces
Hard candy
Chewing gum
Granulated sugar
Instant coffee and tea

Baby Products
 Cereals
 Formulas
 Processed fruit
 Meat products
 Poultry products
 Processed vegetables
 Puddings
 Soups, soup mixes
                          Appendix



            Sources for Vitamin Supplements
        It is important to find vitamin supplements which
contain no sugar, starch, wheat, soy, whey, or yeast. A
yeast-based supplement is not permissible while on this
diet. This eliminates brewer's yeast and most natural B-
complex vitamins.
        People living near large cities or towns should be
able to contact companies or individuals who can supply
them with information about the fillers and binders used in
various vitamin preparations. The information given on
pages 66 and 67 of this book gives the reader some idea a s
to what strengths of each vitamin are appropriate.
        Although it is more convenient to obtain vitamins
locally, often this is not possible. In these cases, the author
suggests that you write to the Freeda Vitamin Company, 36
East 41st St., New York City, N.Y. 10017 for a catalogue and
price list. Their Quin B Strong (with Vitamin C and zinc) is
the recommended B-Complex vitamin for people on the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet. Ask for the SCD-formulated
Quin B Strong. Cut the tablets in quarters or halves depend-
ing upon the amount needed. In Chapter 7, amounts are
suggested for members of the B-Complex vitamin family
which are believed to be suitable for the average adult or
child who h a s a malabsorption problem. Since these vita-
mins are not scored for cutting, it will take a little patience
to cut them evenly. Do not be too concerned if you find you
cannot be exact.
        If sending to this company for your vitamins, you
should estimate the amount of return postage and include
this with your money order so that there will be minimum
delay. The company will follow up with a state-ment and
will credit you with any overpayment.
        If you have a credit card, ask Freeda if you may use it
and in this way avoid all the time-consuming details of
obtaining money orders, figuring out the currency exchange
rate and guessing what the postage will be. Freeda's toll free
number is 1-800-777-3737.
                           Appendix                         183



       There are many companies making good quality B-
Complex vitamins but it is beyond the scope of this book to
investigate them. If you prefer dealing with a company in
your vicinity, it is your responsibility to write to them and
ask about the forbidden binders and fillers such as starch,
lactose, whey powder, and sucrose which are often
combined with vitamin compounds. If you take vitamins
with starch and other forbidden carbohydrates, you lose the
benefit of the diet.

      SOURCES FOR GROUND AND WHOLE NUTS

         For the first three weeks that you try the diet, it is
advisable that you buy nuts by the pound (or kilo) and
grind them yourself. People in or near large cities, with a
little effort, can locate a source of nuts at a reasonable price.
You have a choice of health food stores, bulk food stores,
wholesale1 retail outlets (listed in phone book), and special-
ty companies which supply food items for those on special
diets. Bakeries use nuts in their baked goods; ask a t the
bakery about their supplier.
         When you are convinced, after the first 2-4 weeks,
that the diet is helping you, then it is more economical to
order the ground (minced) blanched almonds or ground
pecans in a large quantity. There should be considerable
saving when you order a 25 Ib. or 3 5 lb. box. It is important
to keep the ground nuts under refrigeration or in a freezer to
prevent rancidity. The Internet section lists sources for the
ground nuts.
                           Appendix



               Mail Order SCD Kitchen Shop
Lucy's Kitchen Shop supplies quality yogurt makers, yogurt cul-
ture, blanched almond flour, ice cream makers, food dehydrators,
and a Specific Carbohydrate cookbook (see following page).

The blanched almond flour from Lucy's Kitchen Shop is whole
almond flour. Some nut flours can be a byproduct (what is left
over after the oils are presscd out). Byproduct nut flour should
not be used by those on the Specific Carbohydrate Diet.

With several years of strict adherence to the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet Lucy can offer assistance with getting you
started.

                     Lucy's Kitchen Shop




                  888-484-2 126 toll free
               360-647-2279 outside the U.S.
 All recipes are grain, sugar, %--
 and virtually lactose free.   Z
                               w6-
                               *-
                                                 LUCY'
                                           SPECIFIC CARBOHYDRATE D I E T
   SALAD DRESSINGS             rr"
   SALADS                      **          COOKBOOK
   SOUPS
   VEGETABLE DISHES            "X-

   SEAFOOD DISHES              xT
                               *-
                               -.
   CHICKEN DISHES
   BEEF DISHES
   PORK DISHES
                               --
                               +.
                               -*
                                      %




   SAUSAGES                    --.
                               I*FC*



                               *-.
                                --*

   BREAKFASTS                  *--
   BREAD AND ROLLS
   CRACKERS
   CONDIMENTS
                               --
                               rgg"..

                               *"*
                               --
                               *--
                                      ..                       by Lucy Rosset
                               --                       Iliurtrotrd by Dawn Sodt
   SAUCES                      we-:

   DESSERTS                    rr+c,
                               -ri+-




Last night we had Chicken Italiano for the first time and it was
wonderful! We also like the Cinnamon Coffee Cake and the Nutty
Caramel Logs! (Susan M.)

The Coffee Cake and Spice Cake are as good as any non-SCD
recipe. The Herb Parmesan Bread has finally got me back to
making sandwiches and ENJOYING them. (Deanna W.)

The Green Salad Dressing is delicious, and I love the macaroons.
Everyone who has eaten with me rants and raves, so thanks!
(Lora V.)

The Onion Parmesan Rolls are the closest to the "real thing" I've
tasted yet. (Peg S.)
186                        Appendix


                     The JuiceDilemma
        During 199 1, a leading commercial juice manufactur-
er had been found guilty of mislabeling their fruit juices.
Their labels stated that there was no sugar, corn syrup, or
sweetener added, but it was found that this labeling was
deceptive. There have been many incidents like this in the
past relating to fruit juice labeling. This is unfortunate
because some companies are reliable but it is beyond the
scope of this book to check them all out. We have requested
and received letters from Welch's and Dole's relating to two
of their products and we feel that we can safely recommend
Welch's purple grape juice in the jar and Dole's unsweetened
pineapple juice in the can. These may be used in addition to
apple cider (not apple juice) from a local cider mill (after you
have talked to the owner) and juices that you squeeze your-
self. We realize that there are many juice companies who are
honest in their labeling and we suggest that, should you
want to use any of them, you do your own detective work by
calling and asking for a letter to back up statements on their
labels, specifically, that no sweeteners have been added.

                 Dry Curd Cottage Cheese
NOTE: This cheese can be frozen and thawed as needed.
        It has been advised in Chapter 9 that you should try
to find a source of dry curd cottage cheese. This type of
cheese is known by different names throughout the world.
In some regions it is called "farmer's cheese" while in other
areas, it is called "baker's cheese." No matter what it is
called, it shares certain characteristics: (1) It is a white dry
curd which has not had additional fluid added to it; (2)
Since it has been separated from the lactose-rich whey and
has been treated with a bacterial culture which eliminates
residual lactose, its lactose content is negligible (about 1%) .
In some areas it is packed in plastic bags while in others
places it is packed in containers containing about one cup.
Sometimes it can be purchased in larger containers which
                             Appendix                           187



can be divided into suitable serving sizes, and frozen to be
taken out of the freezer a s it is needed.
     One of the Canadian producers of this product, Western Dairy
(Western Creamery), not only distributes throughout parts of
Canada but also ships to parts of USA. Western Dairy manufac-
tures one of their products without the coagulating enzyme, ren-
nin, which makes it suitable for the Muslim and Orthodox Jewish
communities.
     To help you obtain this product, local dairies and bakeries
should be contacted to see if it can be purchased locally. If you are
unsuccessful, the following information is offered to help you
obtain this product which is used in recipes for cheese cake, Lois
Lang's Luscious Bread, etc.



CANADA

Western Creamery, Inc.
60 Brisbane Rd., Toronto, Ontario M3J 2K2
Toll free number: 1-800-265-3230
Website: www.WesternCreamery.com
People looking for more information on our products can visit
the website or call our toll-free number. If they are interested in
purchasing our dry curd products, we will direct them to the
nearest retail location where they can purchase the product.



USA

Friendship Dairies
Product: FRIENDSHIP FARMER'S CHEESE
Telephone 1-516-719-4000 ext 227 Tanja
Email: myfriends@friendshipdairies.com
Or visit their website at www.friendshipdairies.com.
                       REFERENCES


                 Chapter 1: Past and Present
Haas, S.V. and M.P.Haas. 1951. Management of Celiac Disease. J.B.
Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
Dohan, F.C. 1966. Cereals and schizophrenia - data and hypotheses.
Acta Psychiatry Scandinavia 42: 125- 152.
Dohan, F.C. 1978. Schizophrenia: Are some food-derived polypeptides
pathogenic? In The Biological Basis of Schizophrenia. Eds. G.
Hemmings and W.A. Hemmings. University Park Press, Baltimore.
Worthen, D. B. and J. R. Lorimer. 1979. Enteral Hyperalimentation with
Chemical& Dgfined Elemental Diets: A Source Book, 2nd ed.
NonvichEaton Pharmaceuticals, Nonvich, New York.
Russell, R.I. 1981. Elemental Diets. CRC Press, Florida.
Morin, C.L., M. Roulet, C.C. Roy, and A. Weber. 1980. Continuous ele-
mental enteral alimentation in children with Crohn's disease and
growth failure. Gastroenterology 79: 1205- 1210.
Sandberg, D.H., P.M. Tocci, and R.M. McKey. 1974. Decrease in sweat
sodium chloride concentrations on limited diets. Pediatric Research
8:386.


      Chapter 2: Scientific Evidence Relating to Diet
Haas, S.V. and M.P. Haas. 195 1. Management @ Celiac Disease. J. B.
Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
deDombal, F.T. 1968. Ulcerative colitis: definition, historical back-
ground, etiology, diagnosis, natural history and local complications.
Postgraduate Medical journal 44:684-692.
Herter, C. 1908. On Infatilism Jam Chronic Intestinal Infection.
MacMillan, New York.
Herter, C. 1910. Observations on intestinal infantilism. Transactions of
the Association of American Physicians 25:528.
Gee, S. 1888. On the coeliac affliction. St. Bartholomew's Hospital
Report 24: 17.
Cozzetto, F.J. 1963. Intestinal lactase deficiency in a patient with cystic
fibrosis. Report of a case with enzyme assay. Pediatrics 32:228-233.
190                              References


7. Jones, R.H.T. 1964. Disaccharide intolerance and mucoviscidosis.
     Lancet 2: 120- 121.
8. Donaldson, R.M.,Jr.and J.D. Grybsoki. 1973. Carbohydrate intolerance.
     In Gastrointestinal Disease. Eds. M.H. Sleisenger and J.S. Fordtran.
     W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
9. Sandberg, D.H., P.M. Tocci, and R.M. McKey. 1974. Decrease in sweat
     sodium chloride concentrations on limited diets. Pediatric Research
     8:386.
10. Struthers, J.E.,Jr.,J.W.Singleton, and F. Kern,Jr. 1965. Intestinal lactase
     deficiency in ulcerative colitis and regional ileitis. Annals of Internal
     Medicine 63:22 1-228.
11. Wright, R., and S.C. Truelove. 1965. A controlled therapeutic trial of
     various diets in ulcerative colitis. British Medical journal 2:138-141.
12. Cady, A.B., J.B. Rhodes, A. Littman, and R.K. Crane. 1967. Significance
     of lactase deficit in ulcerative colitis. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical
     Medicine 70:279-286.
13. Kirschner, B.S., M.V. DeFavaro, and W. Jensen. 1981. Lactose malab-
     sorption in children and adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease.
     Gastroenterology 81:829-832.
14. Truelove, S.C. 1961. Ulcerative colitis provoked by milk. British Medical
     journal 1:154- 160.
15. McMichael, H.B., J. Webb, and A.M. Dawson. 1965. Lactase deficiency
     in adults: A cause of "functional"diarrhoea. Lancet 1:717-720.
16. Chalfin, D. and P.R. Holt. 1967. Lactase deficiency in ulcerative colitis,
     regional enteritis and viral hepatitis. American Journal of Digestive
     Diseases 12:81-87.
17. Gudmand-Hoyer, E. and S. Jarnum. 1970. Incidence and clinical signif-
     icance of lactose malabsorption in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's dis-
     ease. Gut 11:338-343.
18. Tandon, R., H. Mandell, H. M. Spiro, and W. R.,Thayer. 1971. Lactose
     intolerance in Jewish patients with ulcerative colitis. American journal
     of Digestive Diseases 16:845-848.
19. VonBrandes, J.W., and H. Lorenz-Meyer. 1981. Diet excluding refined
     sugar: a new perspective for the treatment of Crohn's disease? A ran-
     domized controlled study. Z. Gastroenterologie 19:1- 12.
20. Alun Jones, A., E. Workman, A.H. Freeman, R.J. Dickinson, A.J.
     Wilson, and 1.0. Hunter. 1985. Crohn's disease: Maintenance of remis-
     sion by diet. Lancet 11: 177-180.
2 1. Morin, C.L., M. Roulet, C.C. Roy, and A. Weber. 1980. Continuous ele-
     mental enteral alimentation in children with Crohn's disease and
     growth failure. Gastroenterology 79: 1205- 1210.
22.VanEys, J. 1977. Nutritional therapy in children with cancer. Cancer
     Research 37:2457-2461.
23. Poley, J.R. 1984. Ultrastructural topography of small bowel mucosa in
     chronic diarrhea in infants and children: Investigations with the scan-
     ning electron microscope. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children. Ed. E.
     Lebenthal. Nestle, VeveyIRaven Press, New York.
                                References                              191



24. Salyers, A.A. 1979. Energy sources of major intestinal fermentative
    anaerobes. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 32: 158- 163.
25. McCarrison, R. 1922. Faulty food in relation to gastrointestinal disor-
    ders. JAMA 78: 1-8.
26. Heaton, K.W. 1990. Dietary factors in the aetiology of inflammatory
    bowel disease. In InLf7mmatoy BowelDisemes. Eds. R.N. Allan, M.R.B
    Keighley, J. Alexander-Williams, and C.E Hawkins. Churchill
    Livingstone, New York.


        Chapter 3: Intestinal Microbes: The Unseen World
    Bengson, M.H. 1979. Effects of bioisolation on the intestinal microflo-
    ra. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 23:1525-1532.
    Kopeloff, N. 1930. Man Versus Microbes. Garden City Publishing Co.,
    Inc., Garden City, New York.
    Haenel, H. 1970. Human normal and abnormal gastrointestinal flora.
    American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 23: 1433-1439.
    Shahani, K.M. and A.D. Ayebo. 1980. Role of dietary lactobacilli in gas-
    trointestinal microecology. American journal of Clinical Nutrition
    33:2448-2457.
    Simon, G.L. and S.L. Gorbach. 1981. Intestinal flora in health and dis-
    ease. In Physiology oJ the Gastrointestinal Pact, Vo1.2. Ed. L.R.
    Johnson. Raven Press, New York.
    Feibusch, J.M. and P.R. Holt. 1982. Impaired absorptive capacity for
    carbohydrate in the aging human. Digestive Diseases and Sciences
    27:1095-1100.
    Gracey, M.S. 1981. Nutrition, bacteria and the gut. British Medical
    Bulletin 37:71-75.
    McEvoy, A., J. Dutton, and 0.F.W.James. 1983. Bacterial contamination
    of the small intestine is an important cause of occult malabsorption in
    the elderly. British Medical journal 287:789-793.
    Dubos, R. 1962. The Unseen World. The Rockefeller Institute Press,
    New York.
    Pope, C.11. 1983. Involvement of the esophagus by infections, systemic
    illnesses and physical agents. In Gastrointestinal Disease. Eds. M.H.
    Sleisenger and J.S. Fordtran. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
    Rolfe, R.D. and S.M. Finegold. 1980. Inhibitory interactions between
    normal fecal flora and Clostridium difficile. American journal of Clinical
    Nutrition 33:2539.
    Donaldson, R.M. 1964. Normal bacterial populations of the intestine
    and their relation to intestinal function. The New England Journal of
    Medicine 270:938-945.
    King, C.E. and P.E. Toskes. 1979. Small intestine bacterial overgrowth.
    Gastroenterology 76: 1035- 1055.
    Haas, S.V. and M.P. Haas. 1951. Management cfCeliac Disease. J.B.
    Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
15. Flexner, S. and J.E. Sweet. 1906. The pathogenesis of experimental coli-
    tis and the relation of colitis in animals and man. journal of
    Experimental Medicine 8:514-535.
16. Morgan, H.D. 1907. Upon the bacteriology of the summer diarrhea of
    infants. British Medical journal 2:16-19.
17. Bassler, A. 1922. Treatment of cases of ulcerative colitis. Medical
    Record 101:227-229.
18. Bargen, J.A. 1924. Experimental studies on etiology of chronic ulcera-
    tive colitis. )AMA 83:332-336.
19. Crohn, B.B., L. Ginzburg, and G.D. Oppenheimer. 1932. Regional ileitis.
    JAMA 99:1323-1329.
20. Menon, T.B. 1930. The pathology of chronic colitis in the tropics. Indian
    Journal of Medical Research 18:137-141.
21. Bargen, J.A., M.C. Copeland, L.A. Buie. 1931. The relation of dysentery
    bacilli to chronic ulcerative colitis. Practitioner 127:235-247.
22. Hurst, A.F. 1931. Ulcerative colitis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
    Medicine 24:785-803.
23. Felsen, J. and W. Wolarsky. 1953. Acute and chronic bacillary dysen-
    tery and chronic ulcerative colitis. JAMA 153:1069- 1072.
24. nkeuchi, A., S.B. Formal, and H. Sprinz. 1968. Acute colitis in Rhesus
    monkey following peroral infection with Shigella flexneri. American
    Journal of Pathology 52:503-529.
25. Staley, T.E., L.D. Corley, and E.W. Jones. 1970. Early pathogenesis of
    colitis in neonatal pigs monocontaminated with Escherichia coli. Fine
    structural changes in the colonic epithelium. American Journal of
    Digestive Diseases 15:923-935.
26. DuPont, H.I., S.B. Formal, R.B. Hornick, M.J. Snyder, J.P. Libonati, D.G.
    Sheahan, E.H. LaBrec, and J.P. Kalas. 1971. Pathogenesis of
    Escherichia coli diarrhea. The New England Journal of Medicine 285: 1-
    9.
27. Metchnikoff, E. 1908. The Prolongahon oflge. G.P. Putnam's Sons,
    New York.
28. Robins-Browne, R.M. and M.M. Levine. 1981. The fate of ingested lac-
    tobacilli in the proximal small intestine. American Journal of Clinical
    Nutrition 34:5 14-519.
29. Kolars, J.C. M.D. Levitt, M.M. Aouji, and D.A. Savaino. 1984. Yoghurt -
    an autodigesting source of lactose. New England Journal of Medicine
    31O:l-3.
30. McCarrison, R. 1922. Faulty food in relation to gastrointestinal disor-
    ders. JAMA 78:l-8.
31. Necheles, H. and C. Beck. 1965. Lactobacillus and intestinal flora.
    Applied Therapeutics 7:463-465.
32. Sandine, W.E., K.S. Muralidhara, P.R. Elliker, and D.C. England. 1972.
    Lactic acid bacteria in food and health. Journal of Milk and Food
    Technology 35:69 1-702.
33. Johnson, W.C. 1974. Oral elemental diet. Archives of Surgery 108:32-
    34.
                                References                              193



34. George, W.L., R.D. Rolfe, V.L. Sutter, and S.M. Finegold. 1979. Diarrhea
    and colitis associated with antimicrobial therapy in man and animals.
    American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 32:251-257.
35. Willoughby, J.M.T. 1982. The alimentary system. In Iatrogenic
    Diseases, 2nd ed. Eds. P.P. D'Arcy and J.P. Griffin. Oxford University
    Press, New York.
36. Ziv, G.M., M.J. Paape, and A.M. Dulin. 1983. Influence of antibiotics
    and intramammary antibiotic products on phagocytosis of
    Staphylococcus aureaus by bovine leukocytes. American Journal of
    Veterinary Research 44:385-388.
37. Low-Beer, T.S. and A.E. Reed. 1971. Progress report. Diarrhoea:
    Mechanisms and treatment. Gut 12:1021-1036.
38. Keusch, G.T., and D.H. Present. 1976. Summary of a workshop on clin-
    damycin colitis. Journal of infectious Diseases 133:578-587.
39. Toffler, R.B., E.G. Pingoud, and M.I. Burrell. 1978. Acute colitis related
    to penicillin and penicillin derivatives. Lancet 2:707-709.
40. Sakurai, Y., H. Tsuchiya, F. Ikegami, T. Funatomi, S. Takasu, and T.
    Uchikoshi. 1979. Acute right-sided hemorrhagic colitis associated with
    oral administration of ampicillin. Digestive Diseases and Sciences
    24:910-915.
41. Boriello, S.P., R.H. Jones, and I. Phillips. 1980. Rifampicin-associated
    pseudomembranous colitis. British Medical journal 281 :1180- 1181.
42. Fournier, G., J. Orgiazzi, B. Lenoir, and M. Dechavannne.
    Pseudomembranous colitis probably due to rifampicin. Lancet 1:101.
43. Friedman, R.J., I.E. Mayer, J.T. Galambos, and T. Hersh. 1980.
    Oxacillin-induced pseudomembranous colitis. American Journal of
    Gastroenterology 72:445-447.
44. Saginur, R., C.R. Hawley, and J.G. Bartlett. 1980. Colitis-associated
    metronidazole therapy. Journal of infectious Disease 141:772-774.
45. Thomson, G., A.H. Clark, K. Hare, and W.G.S. Spilg. 1981.
    Pseudomembranous colitis after treatment with metronidazole. British
    Medical journal 282:864-865.
46. Weidema, W.F., M.F. Von Meyenfeidt, P.B. Soeters, R.I.C. Wesdorp, and
    J.M. Greep. 1980. Pseudomembranous colitis after whole gut irrigation
    with neomycin and erythromycin base. British journal of Surgery
    67:895-896.
47. Coleman, D.L. P.H. Juergensen, M.H. Brand, and F.O. Finkelstein. 1981.
    Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea during administration of intraperi-
    toneal cephalothin. Lancet 1:1004.
48. Lishman, A.H., I.J. Al-Jumaili, and C.O.Record. 1981. Spectrum of
    antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. Gut 22:34-37.
49. Taylor, A.G. 1976. Toxins and the genesis of specific lesions:
    Enterotoxin and exfoliatin. In Mechanisms in Bacterial Tdxicology. Ed.
    A.W. Bernheimer, John Wiley and Sons, New York.
50. Arbuthnott, J.P. and C.J. Smith. 1979. Bacterial adhesion in
    hostlpathogen interactions in animals. In Adhesion ofMicroorganisms
    to Swaces. Eds. D.C. Ellwood and J. Melling. Academic Press, London.
194                             References


51. Salyers, A.A. 1979. Energy sources of major intestinal fermentative
    anaerobes. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 32:158-163.
52. Moore, W.E.C. and L.V. Holdeman. 1975. Discussion of current bacteri-
    ological investigations of the relationships between intestinal flora,
    diet, and colon cancer. Cancer Research 35:3418-3420.


               Chapter 4: Breaking the Vicious Cycle
1. Stephen, A.M. 1985. Effect of food on the intestinal microflora. In Food
    and the Gut. Eds. J.O. Hunter and V.A. Jones. Bailliere Tindall, London.
2. Weijers, H.A. and J.H. vandeKamer. 1965. Treatment of malabsorption
    of carbohydrates. Modern Treatment 2:378-390.
3 . Oh, M.S., K.R. Phelps, M.Traube, J.L. Barbosa-Salvidar, C. Boxhill, and
    H.J. Carroll. 1979. D-Lactic acidosis in a man with the short-bowel syn-
    drome. New England Journal of Medicine 30 1:249-252.
4. Stolberg, L., R. Rolfe, N. Gitlin, J. Merritt, L. Mann, J. Linder, and S.
    Finegold. 1982. D-Lactic acidosis due to abnormal gut flora. New
    England Journal of Medicine 306: 1344-1348.
5. Traube, M., J. Bock, and J.L. Boyer. 1982. D-Lactic acidosis after
    jejunoileal bypass. New England Journal of Medicine 307:1027.
6. Lifshitz, F. 1982. Necrotizing enterocolitis and feedings. In Pediatric
    Nutn'tion. Ed. F. Lifshitz. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York.
7. Jonas, A., P.R. Flanagan, and G.C. Forstner. 1977. Pathogenesis of
    mucosal injury in the blind loop syndrome. journal of Clinical
    Investigation 60: 1321-1330.
8. Lee, P.C. 1984. Transient carbohydrate malabsorption and intolerance
    in diarrheal diseases of infancy. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children. Ed. E.
    Lebenthal. Nestle, VeveyJRaven Press, New York.
9. Johnson, W.C. 1974. Oral elemental diet. Archives of Surgery 108:32-
    34.
10. Jarnum, S. 1976. Chemically defined diets in medicine. Nutrition and
    Metabolism 20 (Supplement 1):19-26.
11. Diez-Gonzalez, F., T.R. Callaway, M.G. Kizoulis, and J.B. Russell. 1998.
    Grain feeding and dissemination of acid-resistant Escherichia coli from
    cattle. Science 28 1:1666- 1668.
12. Pai, C.H., R. Gordon, H.V. Sims, et al. 1984. Sporadic cases of hemor-
    rhagic colitis associated with Escherichia coli 0157:H7. Annals of
    Internal Medicine 101:738-742.
13. Riley, L.W., R.S. Remis, S.D. Helgerson, et al. 1983. Hemorrhagic colitis
    associated with a rare Escherichia coli serotype. New England Journal
    of Medicine 308:681-685.
14. Burke, D.A. and A.T.R. Axon. 1987. Ulcerative colitis and Escherichia
    coli with adhesive properties. Journal of Clinical Pathology 40:782786.
                 Chapter 5: Carbohydrate Digestion
1. Go, V.L.W. and W.H.J. Summerskill. 1971. Digestion, maldigestion, and
    the gastrointestinal hormones. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.
    24: 160-167.
2. Gee, S. 1888. On the coeliac affliction. St. Bartholomew Hospital Report
    24:17.
3. Moog, F. 1981. The lining of the small intestine. Scientific American
    245:154-176.
4. Poley, J. R. 1984. Ultrastructural topography of small bowel mucosa in
    chronic diarrhea in infants and children: Investigations with the scan-
    ning electron microscope. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children. Ed. E.
    Lebenthal. Nestle, VeveyIRaven Press, New York.
5. Plotkin, G.R. and K.J. Isselbacher. 1964. Secondary disaccharidase defi-
    ciency in adult celiac disease (non tropical sprue) and other malabsorp-
    tion states. New England journal of Medicine. 271:1033-1037.
6. Burke, V., K.R. Kerry, and C.M. Anderson. 1965. The relationship of
    dietary lactose to refractory diarrhea in infancy. Australian Paediatric
    journal 1:147- 160.
7. Kojecky, Z. and Z. Matlocha. 1965. Quantitative differences of intestin-
    al disaccharidase activity following the resection of stomach.
    Gastroenterologia (Basel) 104:343-35 1.
8. McMichael, H.B., J. Webb, and A.M. Dawson. 1965. Lactase deficiency
    in adults: a cause of functional diarrhoea. Lancet 1:717:720.
9. Weser, E. and M.H. Sleisenger. 1965. Lactosuria and lactase deficiency
    in adult celiac disease. Gastroenterology 48:571-578.
10. Weser, E., W. Rubin, L. Ross, and M.H. Sleisenger. 1965. Lactase defi-
    ciency in patients with the "irritable-colon syndrome." New England
    Journal of Medicine 273: 1070- 1075.
11. Welsh, J.D., O.M. Zschiesche, J. Anderson, and A. Walker. 1969.
    Intestinal disaccharidase activity in celiac sprue (gluten-sensitive
    enteropathy). Archives of Internal Medicine 123:33-38.
12. Prinsloo, J.G., W. Wittmann, H. Kruger, E. Freier. 1971. Lactose absorp-
    tion and mucosal disaccharidases in convalescent pellagra and kwashi-
    orkor children. Archives of Diseases of Childhood 46:474-478.
13. King, E. and P.P. Toskes. 1979. Small intestine bacterial overgrowth.
    Gastroenterology 76: 1035- 1055.
14. Gray, G. 1982. Intestinal disaccharidase deficiencies and glucose-galac-
    tose malabsorption. In The Metabolic Basis ofZnhen'ted Disease. Eds.
    J.B.Stanbury, J.B.Wyngaarden, D.S.Fredrickson, J.S.Goldstein, and
    M.S.Brown. 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
15. Campos, J.V,M.,U.F. Neto, F.R.S. Patricio, J. Wehba, A.A. Carvalho, and
    M. Shiner. 1979. Jejunal mucosa in marasmic children. Clinical, patho-
    logical, and fine structural evaluation of the effect of protein-energy
    malnutrition and environmental contamination. American Journal of
    Clinical Nutrition. 32: 1575-1591.
196                             References


16. Brunser, 0 . and M. Araya. 1984. Damage and repair of small intestinal
    mucosa in acute and chronic diarrhea. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children.
    Ed. E. Lebenthal. Nestle VeveyIRaven Press, New York.
17. Dvorak, A.M., A.B. Connell, and G. R. Dickersin. 1979. Crohn's disease:
    A scanning electron microscopic study. Human Pathology 10:165- 177.
18. Lee, P.C. 2984. Transient carbohydrate malabsorption and intolerance
    in diarrhea disease of infancy. In Chronic Diarrhea of Children. Ed. E.
    Lebenthal. Nestle, VeveyIRaven Press, New York.
19. Pope, C.E. 11. 1983. Involvement of the esophagus by infections, sys-
    temic illnesses and physical agents. In GastrointestinaI Disease. Eds.
    M.H. Sleisenger and J.S. Fordtran. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
20. Anderson, I.H., A.S. Levine, and M.D. Levitt. 1981. Incomplete absorp-
    tion of the carbohydrate in all-purpose wheat flour. New England
    Journal of Medicine 304:89 1-892.
21. Feibusch, J.M. and P.R. Holt. 1982. Impaired absorptive capacity for
    carbohydrate in the aging human. Digestive diseases and Sciences
    27:1095-1100.
22. Rackis, J.J. 1975. Oligosaccharides of food legumes: Alpha-galactosi-
    dase activity and the flatus problem. In PhysioIogri.aI Eyects @Food
    Carbohydrates. Eds. A. Jeanes and J. Hodge. American Chemical
    Society, Washington, D.C.
23. Fisher, S.E., G. Leone, R.H. Kelly. 1981. Chronic protracted diarrhea:
    Intolerance to dietary glucose polymers. Pediatrics 67:271-273.
24. Lebenthal, E., L. Heitlinger, P.C. Lee, K.S. Nord, C. Holdge, S.P. Brooks,
    and D. George. 1983. Corn syrup sugars: In vitro and in vivo digestibil-
    ity and clinical tolerance in acute diarrhea of infancy. Journal of
    Pediatrics 103:29-34.
25. Juliano, B.O. 1972. Physicochemical properties of starch and protein in
    relation to grain quality and nutritional value of rice. Internation Rice
    Research Institute (Los Banos) Annual Report.
26. Weiner, M. and J. VanEys. 1983. In Nicotinic Acid. Marcel Dekker, Inc.
    New York.
27. Cooke, W.T. and G.K.T. Holmes. 1984. Coeliac Disease. Churchill
    Livingstone, New York.
28. Gunja-Smith, Z., J.J. Marshall, C. Mercier, E.E. Smith, and W.J. Whelan.
     1970. A revision of the Meyer-Bernfield model of glycogen and amy-
    lopectin. FEBS Letters 12:101- 104.
29. Davidson, G.P. and R.R.W. Townley. 1977. Structural and functional
    abnormalities of the small intestine due to nutritional folic acid defi-
    ciency in infancy. journal of Paediatrics 90:590-595.


                      Chapter 6: The Celiac Story
1. Crichton, M. 1968. A Case ofNeed. Penguin Books, New York, p. 84.
2. Aretaeus the Cappadocian. 1856. On the Cause and Symptoms of
   Chronic Disease. The Sydenham Society, London.
                                References                              197



3. Gull, W. 1853, Fatty Stools from Disease of the Mesenteric Glands.
    Guy's Hospital Report 1:369.
4. Gee, S. 1888. On the Coeliac Affection. St. Bartholomew's Hospital
    Report 24:17.
5. Herter, C. 1908. On Znfinh'lismcfiom Chronic Intestinal Infech'on.
    MacMillan, New York.
6. Newland, J. 1921. Prolonged intolerance to carbohydrates. Transactions
    of American Pediatric Society. 44: 11.
7. Golden Jubiliee World Tribute to Dr. Sidney V. Haas. 1949. The Stoly of
    Dr. Sidng K Haas. New York Academy of Medicine, New York.
8. Haas, S.V. and M.P. Haas. 1951 Management of Celiac Disease. J. B.
    Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. p.x
9. Editorial, April 5, 1949. New York Times. p. 28, col. 2
10. Physicians Honor Pediatric Pioneer. April 6, 1949. New York Times. p.
    34, col. 2
11. Haas, S.V. and M.P. Haas. 1951. Management of Celiac Disease. J. B.
    Lippincott Company, Philadelphia.
12. Anderson, C.M., J.M. French, H.H. Sammons, A.C, Frazer, J.W. Gerrard,
    and J.M. Smellie. 1952. Coeliac disease: Gastrointestinal studies and
    the effect of dietary wheat flour. Lancet 1: 836-842
13. Matthews, D.M. 1975. Intestinal absorption of peptides. Physiological
    Review 55:537-608.
14. Moog, F. 1981. The lining of the small intestine. Scientific American
    245:154-176.
15. Cluysenaer,.O.J. J. and J.H.M.vanTongeren. 1977. Malabsorption in
    Coeliac Sprue. Martinus Nijhoff Medical Division, Hague.
16. Phelan, J.J., F.M.Stevens, W.F. Cleere, B. McNicholl, C.F. McCarthy, and
    P.F. Fottrell. 1978. The detoxification of gliadin by the enzymic cleavage
    of a side-chain substituent. In Perspech'ves in Coeliac Disease. Eds. B.
    McNicholl, C.F. McCarthy and P.F. Fottrell. University Park Press,
    Baltimore.
17. Stevens, EM., J.J. Phelan, B. McNicholl, F.R. Comerford, P.F. Fottrell,
    and C.F. McCarthy. 1978. Clinical demonstration of the reduction of
    gliadin toxicity by enzymic cleavage of side-chain substituent. In
    Perspectives in Coeliac Disease. Eds. B. McNicholl, C.F. McCarthy, and
    P.F. Fottrell. University Park Press, Baltimore.
18. Anderson, I.H.,   A.S. Levine, and M.D. Levitt. 1981. Incomplete absorp-
    tion of the carbohydrate in all purpose wheat flour. New England
    Journal of Medicine 304:89 1-892.
19. Cooke, W.T. and G.K.T. Holmes. 1984. Coeliac Disease. Churchill
    Livingstone, New York.
20. Congdon, P., M.K. Mason, S. Smith, A. Crollick, A. Steel, and J.
    Littlewood. 1981 Small bowel mucosa in asymptomatic children with
    celiac disease. American Journal of Disease in Children 135: 118- 122.
198                             References


21. Rubin, C.E., L.L. Brandborg, A.L. Flick, P. Phelps, C. Parmentier, and S.
    van Niel. 1962. Studies in celiac sprue. 111. The effect of repeated wheat
    instillation into the proximal ileum of patients on a gluten-free diet.
    Gastroenterology 43:62 1-641.
22. Bleumink, E., 1974. Allergens and toxic protein in food. In Coeliac
    Disease. Eds. W.T.J.M. Hekkens and A.S. Peiia. Stenfert Kroese. Leiden.
23. Weiser, M.M. 1976. An alternative mechanism for gluten toxicity in
    coeliac disease. Lancet 1:567-569.
24. Baker, P.G. and A.E. Read. 1976. Oats and barley toxicity in celiac
    patients. Postgraduate Medical Journal 52:264-268.
25. Strunk, R.C., J.L. Pinnas, T.J. John, R.C. Hansen, and J.L. Blazovich.
    1978. Rice hypersensitivity associated with serum complement depres-
    sion. Clinical Allergy 8:5 1-58.
26. Vitoria, J.C., C. Camarero, A. Sojo, A. Ruiz, and J. Rodriguez-Soriano.
    1982. Enteropathy related to fish, rice, and chicken. Archives of
    Disease in Childhood 57:44-48.
27. Kagnoff, M.F. 1995. Celiac disease. In Textbook of Gastroenterology.
    Vol. 2. Eds. T. Yamada et al. J.B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. p.,
    1644.
28. Creamer, B. 1966. Coeliac thoughts. Gut 7:569-571.
29. Poley, J.R. 1984. Ultrastructural topography of small bowel mucosa in
    chronic diarrhea in infants and children: Investigations with the scan-
    ning electron microscope. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children. Ed. E.
    Lebenthal. Nestle, VeveyIRaven Press, New York.
30. King, C.E. and P.P. Toskes. 1979. Small intestine bacterial overgrowth.
    Gastroenterology 76: 1035- 1055.
31. Araya, M. and J.A. Walker-Smith. 1975. Specificity of ultrastructural
    changes of small intestinal epithelium in early childhood. Archives of
    Disease in Childhood 50:844-855.
32. Brunser, 0. and M. Araya. 1984. Damage and repair of small intestinal
    mucosa in acute and chronic diarrhea. In Chronic Diarrhea in Children.
    Ed. E. Lebenthal. Nestle VeveyJRaven Press, New York.
33. Holmes, G.K.T., P.L. Stokes, T.M. Sorahan, P. Prior, J.A.H. Waterhouse,
    and W.T. Cooke. 1976. Coeliac disease, gluten free diet, and malignan-
    cy. Gut 17:612-619.
34. Lifshitz, F. and G. Holman. 1966. Familial celiac disease with intestinal
    disaccharidase deficiencies. American journal of Digestive Diseases
    11:377-387.
35. Berg, N.O., A. Dahlqvist, T. Lindberg, and A. Norden. 1970. Intestinal
    dipeptidases and disaccharidases in celiac disease in adults.
    Gastroenterology 59:575-582.
36. Plotkin, G.R. and K.J. Isselbacher. 1964. Secondary disaccharidase defi-
    ciency in adult celiac disease (non tropical sprue) and other malabsorp-
    tion states. New England Journal of Medicine 271 :1033-1037.
37. Townley, R.R.W., K.T. Khaw, and H. Schwachman. 1965. Quantitative
    assay of disaccharidase activities of small intestinal mucosal biopsy
    specimens in infancy and childhood. Pediatrics 36:9 11-921.
                                  References                                199



38. Arthur, A.B. 1966. Intestinal disaccharidase deficiency in children with
    celiac disease. Archives of Diseases in Children 41:519-524.
39. Littman, A. and J.B. Hammond. 1965. Diarrhoea in adults caused by
    deficiency in intestinal disaccharidases. Gastroenterology 48:237-249.
40. Personal correspondence (unpublished). Nov. 6, 1996. From Jennifer
    Stenberg to Elaine Gottschall. Writer's address; R. R. I., Holstein, Ont.,
    Canada. NOG 2A0.


                   Chapter 7: The Brain Connection
1. Cooke, WT. and WT. Smith. 1966. Neurological disorders associated
    with adult coeliac disease. Brain 89:683-722.
2. Gracey, M.S. 1981. Nutrition, bacteria, and the gut. British Medical
    Bulletin 37:71-75.
3. McEvoy, A.J., J. Dutton, and O.F. W James. 1983. Bacterial contamina-
    tion of the small intestine is an important cause of occult malabsorption
    in the elderly. British Medical journal 287:789-793.
4. Dakshinamurti, K. 1982. Neurobiology of pyrodoxine. In Advances in
    Nutritional Research Vol. 4. Ed. H. Draper. Plenum Press, New York.
5. Levenson, A.J. 1983. Organic brain syndromes, other nonfunctional
    psychiatric disorders, and pseudodementia. In Fundamentals o f
    Genam'cMedicine. Eds. R.D.T. Cape, R.M. Coe, and 1. Rossman. Raven
    Press, New York.
6. Baruk, H. 1978. Psychoses from digestive origins. In The Biological
    Basis gfSchizophrenia. Eds. G. and W H. Hemmings. University Park
    Press, Baltimore.
7. Buscaino, G.A. 1978. The amino-hepato-entero-toxic theory of schizo-
    phrenia: an historical review. In The Biologi'cal Bask ofschizophrenia.
    Eds. G. and W.H. Hemmings. University Park Press, Baltimore.
8. Dohan, EC. 1966. Cereals and schizophrenia-data and hypotheses.
    Acta Psychiatry Scandinavia 42: 125-152.
9. Hunter, J.0.1991. Food allergy-or enterometabolicdisorder? The Lancet
    338:495-496.
10. Truss, C. Orian. 1983. The Missing Diagnosis, R 0. Box 26508,
    Birmingham, Alabama 35226.
11. Stephen, A.M. 1985. Effect of food on the intestinal microflora. In Food
    and the Gut. Eds. J.O. Hunter and V .A. Jones. Bailhere andall, London.
12. Man S. Oh, K.R. Phelps, M. Traube, J.L. Barbosa-Salvidar, C. Boxhill,
    and H.J. Carroll. 1979. D-lactic acidosis in a man with the short-bowel
    syndrome. The New England Journal of Medicine 301:249-252.
13. Stolberg, L., R. Rolfe, N. Gitlin, J. Merritt, L. Mann, Jr., J. Linder, and S.
    Finegold. 1982. D-lactic acidosis due to abnormal flora. The New
    England journal of medicine 306:13441348.
14. Perlmutter, D.H., J.T. Boyle, J.M. Campos, J.M. Egler, and J.B. Watkins,
    1983. D-lactic acidosis in children: an unusual metabolic complication
    of small bowel resection. The journal of Pediatrics 102:234-238.
                                References


10. Mayne, A.J., D.J. Handy, M.A. Preece, R.H. George, and I.W. Booth.
    1990. Dietary management of D-lactic acidosis in short bowel syn-
    drome. Archives of Diseases of Childhood 65:229-23 1.
11. Thurn, J.R., G.L. Pierpont, C.W. Ludvigsen, and J.H. Eckfeldt. 1985. D-
    lactate encephalopathy. The American Journal of Medicine 79:717-
    721.
12. Melmud, R., C. K. Schneider, R. A. Fabes, et al. 2000.Metabolic mark-
    ers and gastrointestinal symptoms in children with autism and related
    disorders. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition.
    31:A116.
13. Wakefield, A.J., S. H. Murch, A. Anthony, J. Linnell, D. M. Casson, M.
    Malik, M. Berclowitz, A.P. Dhillon, M. A. Thomson, P. Harvey, A.
    Valentine, S.E. Davies, and J. A. Walker-Smith. 1998. Ileal-lymphoid-
    nodular hyperplasia, non-specific colitis, and pervasive developmental
    disorder in children. Lancet 35 1: 637-4 1.
14. Wakefield, A.J., A. Anthony, S.H. Murch, M. Thomson, , S.M.
    Montgomer, S. Davies, J. J. O'Leary, m. Berelowitz, and J.A. Walker-
    Smith. 2000. Enterocolitis in children with developmental disorders.
    American Journal of Gastroenterology 95:2285-2295.
15. Hovarth, K., J.C. Papadimitriou, A. Rabsztyn, C. Drachenberg, and J. T.
    Tlldon. 1999. Gastrointestinal abnormalities in children with autistic
    disorder. Journal of Pediatrics 135: 559-63.
16. Harvard Autism Project. 2002. Initial Autism Research Findings at
    Harvard Massachusetts General Hospital.
17. Wakefield, A. J. 2002. The gut-brain axis in childhood developmental
    disorders. In Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition.
    Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc., Philadelphia.
18. Butterworth, R. F. 2000. Complications of cirrhosis 111 hepatic
    Encephalopathy. Journal of Hepatology 32: 171- 180.
19. Bolte, E. R. 1998. Autism and Clostridium tetani. Medical Hypothesis
    55:133-44.
20. Jyonouchi, H, S. Sun, and N. Itokazu. 2002. Innate immunity associ-
    ated with inflammatory responses and cytokine production against
    common dietary proteins in patients with autism spectrum disorder.
    Neuropsychobiology 46:76-84.
21. Ulevitch, R.J. and P.S. Tobias. 1999. Recognition of gram-negative
    bacteria and endotoxin by the innate immune system. Current
    Opinions Immunology. 11:19-22. Until about 10 years ago the exact
    mechanisms controlling cellular responses to the endotoxin - or
    lipopolysaccharide (LPS) - of Gram-negative bacteria were unknown.
    Now a considerable body of evidence supports a model where LPS or
    LPS-containing particles (including intact bacteria) form complexes
    with a serum protein known as LPS-binding protein; the LPS in the
    complex is subsequently transferred to another protein which binds
    LPS, CD14. The latter is found on the plasma membrane of most cell
    types of the myeloid lineage as well as in the serum in its soluble form.
    LPS binding of these two forms of CD 14 results in the activation of cell
    types of myeloid and nonmyeloid lineages respectively.
202                            References


22. Medzhitov, R. and C. Janeway. 2000. Innate immunity. The New
    England Journal of Medicine 343:338-344.


                   Chapter 9: Introducing the Diet
1. Haas, S.V. andM.P. Haas. 1951. ManagementcfCeliacDiseme. J.13.
   Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
2. Kraybill, H.F. 1977. Nonoccupational environmental cancer. In
   Advances in Modem Toxicology.Vol. 3. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
3. Delmont, J. 1983. Milk consumption and rejection throughout the
   world. In Milk Intolerance and Rgection. Ed. J. Delmont. Karger, Basel.
4. Van Soest, P.J. 1981. Some factors influencing the ecology of gut fer-
   mentation in man. In Banbuiy Report 7 - Gastrointestinal Cancer:
   Endogenous Factors. Eds. W.R. Bruce, P. Correa, M. Lipkin,
   S.R.Tannenbaum, and T.D. Wilkins. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.
5. Connon, J.J. and K.N. Jeejeebhoy. 1985. General approach to acute and
   chronic diarrhea. In Gastrointeshnal Diseases. Ed. K.N. Jeejeebhoy.
   Medical Examination Publishing Co., Inc., New Hyde Park, New York.


                           Gourmet Section
1. Fisher, S. E., G. Leone, R. H. Kelly. 1981. Chronic protracted diarrhea:
    Intolerance to dietary glucose polymers. Pediatrics 67:271-273.
                                                                                  --



                                      INDEX


 Not all food items have been listed in the index. For a complete listing of permitted
 foods, see Chapter 10, The Specific Carbohydrate Diet. References with Roman
 numerals, i-iv, are found in the Foreword.

A                                              overgrowth 10, 13,33, 41, 52,54,
Absorption 6, 9, 13, 19,20,21, 22,               55,57
     26, 33, 35,39, 45, 55, 66, 174            (see Dysbiosis) 47
     incomplete absorption 39                 putrefactive 14
   (see malabsorption)                      ~ a n a n a5, 35, 36, 60, 62, 69, 75, 84,
Acid                                          85, 123, 124, 125, 129, 136, 143,
  acetic 18, 177                              167
  amino 37,38, 172                          Barley 40, 74
  D-lactic 48, 55                           Baruk, Dr. H. 46
  lactic 18, 177                            Beans
Aggressiveness 48                             fava 74
Aging process 13                              garbanzo 74
Allergies ii, 47                              mung 74
  allergic reaction 47, 54, 69                Soy 8, 182
  allergy-testing ii                          sprouts 27, 74
Amaranth 67, 74                             Bee pollen 64
Amylopectin 28, 29, 30                      Behavior 2, 18,54,55, 56,57, 58
Amylose 28, 29, 30                            abusive 48
Animal products 64                          Biopsy 25, 40, 41
Antacids 13                                 Blood brain barrier 5 7
Antibiotics i, 15, 48, 55, 56               Blood loss 5
Antibodies 39, 58                           Bolte, E.R. 57
Attention deficit disorder (ADD) 52         Bowel obstruction 53
Autism                                      Bowel-brain connection 47, 49
  (see Chapter 8)                           Brain allergy 47
Autism spectrum disorder 51, 52, 58,        Brain function
    172                                       (see Chapter 7) 45
Autointoxication 14, 15                       abnormal 18
  (see Toxicity, microbial, intestinal)       spaciness iii
      14                                    Bran 30,67
B                                           Bread 7,39, 67, 74, 121
Bacteria9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 19, 24,      Buckwheat 67, 74
    29, 33, 46, 48, 55, 57, 58, 67, 76,     Bulgur 74
    80,157, 158, 177                        Buscaino, Dr. G.A.46
    (see Toxins, bacterial) 9              C
    clostridium tetani 57                  Cabbage 69, 74,81
    E.coli 19, 46, 55                      Calcium 66, 161
    fermentative 14, 18                    Caloric energy 2 1
    gram-negative 57                       Cancer chemotherapy 2
                                           Candidiasis (yeast infection) 47
                                         Index


Carbohydrate@)                                  46, 49.52, 53, 61, 62, 63, 65, 68,
  addiction 53                                  69, 74, 75, 172
  complex ii                                  Digestion 6, 8, 9, 13, 19, 20, 32, 33,
  intolerance ii                                34,35, 39, 42, 45, 54, 55, 56, 57,
  undigested 55                                 158, 159,177,178, 193
Carob 78                                        (see Chapter 5)
carrot 63, 69, 74, 81                         Disaccharidases 24, 25, 177
Carrots 6 1                                   Disaccharides 3, 8, 21, 24, 25, 27, 28,
Casein 57, 162, 172                             42, 56, 57, 177
Celiac diet 35, 53                            Diverticulitis 1, 70
Celiac Disease 1, 2, 5, 8, 14, 24, 25,        D-lactic acid (see Acids)
    31, 45,53, 70                             Dohan, F.C. 2, 47
    (see Chapter 6)                           Donaldson, Dr. R.M., Jr. 15
Cells                                         Dr. Gunja-Smith 29
  "gatekeeper" 22                             Dysbiosis 47
  goblet 26                                   E
  intestinal absorptive 8, 22, 26, 37,        Eggs 69, 73, 80
    42,56, 177, 179                           Elemental Diet 2, 3, 7, 8, 20
  white blood 38                              Endotoxin 57, 58
Cereals 7, 28, 47, 49, 67, 74, 181            Enterometabolic disorder 47, 54
Cheese 27, 28, 62, 63, 64, 69, 73, 79,        Enzyme (intestinal digestive) 8, 19,
  80.81                                           37,38, 39, 56, 159, 174, 178, 179
Chocolate 78                                  Esophagitis 56
Cholera 24                                    F
                                              I
Colon6, 11, 12, 13, 18, 19, 24, 33,           Fatigue iii, 33
  47,54, 55, 70
Constipation iii, 2, 5, 52, 162, 172          Fats ii, 5, 21, 22, 33, 34, 35, 36, 41,
                                                  63, 174
Contraceptive pill 65                         Fermentation 17, 18, 19, 26,32,33,
Corn ii, 6, 27, 28,32,38, 67, 74, 77            39, 47, 48, 54,55, 62, 63, 158,
  corn syrup 28, 75, 76, 78, 161, 184           159, 177
  cornstarch 78, 179                          Fiber i, ii, 30, 67, 78, 177, 179
  starch 29                                   Flour 32, 35, 37,38, 39, 67, 74, 75,
  syrup 27                                      79
Cortisone (steriods) 1, 16                      low gluten wheat 39
Cottonseed 67, 74                             Fruits 3, 8, 27, 28,30, 36, 60, 61, 62,
Couscous 74
Cramps, abdominal 5, 25, 68, 69
Crohn, Dr. B.B. 14
Crohn's disease ii, iii, 1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 14,   Galactose 27
  25, 41, 46, 49, 56, 70, 169                  blood galactose 63
Cystic fibrosis of the pancreas 1, 2, 9       Gas, intestinal 5, 17, 18, 19, 39, 68,
Cytokines 58                                      69, 164, 166, 172
D                                               hydrogen 18,56
Dairy products 7, 52,59, 62, 73               Gastrectomy 24
                                              Gee, Dr. S. 6
Dates 74                                      Genetic problem
Delirium 46, 48                                 lactase 25
Detoxification 59                             Gliadin
Diarrhea                                        alpha 38
  (see Chapter 6)                             Glucose 3, 8, 27, 28, 29, 78, 79, 174
    1,2,5,6,8, 15,21,24,25,31,45,
                                           Index


Gluten 26, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,        Intolerance
    52,57                                        dairy products, milk ii, 8, 25, 41
    diet, gluten-free i, ii, 40, 42, 43,         gluten 8
      53, 172                                    soy protein 25, 41
  extraction process 39                       Iron 64, 66
  gluten-celiac hypothesis 39, 42             Irritable bowel syndrome (colon) i, iii
Grains 6, 24, 27, 30,37, 38, 39, 40,          lsomaltase 25
    43, 47, 52, 53, 74, 77, 78                Isomaltose 24, 27, 28, 29, 57, 161
  grain-free diet 2                           J
Granules                                      Jyonouchi, Dr. H. 57, 58
  wheat flour 39                              K
Gunja-Smith, Dr. Z. 29
Gut-Brain Axis 52                             Kwashiorkor 41
H                                             L
Haas, Drs... M.P. and S.V. 1.34, 35,          Lactase 24, 25,56, 77
  36, 37, 70, 173                             Lactic acid
Heaton, Dr. K.W. 7                              (see acids)
Herbs 64                                      Lactose 6, 8, 17, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28,
  herb tea 76                                   42, 57, 62, 63, 64, 73, 76, 77, 78,
  tea 76                                        79, 157, 180, 183, 184
Herter, Dr. C.A. 5, 33,34                     Lactose-hydrolyzed milk (LHM) 27,
Honey 3, 8, 26, 27, 28, 61, 62, 74,             63
  76, 77, 78, 79, 80                          Laxative 6 1, 76
Hunter, Dr. J.O. ii, 47, 54                   Legumes 27,30, 70, 73
Hydrochloric acid 13                          Lentils 27, 73, 79
Hydrogen breath test 56                       Lipopolysaccharide 58
Hyperactivity 2                               Lorenz-Meyer, Dr. H. 6
Hypoactivity                                  Lymphoid nodular hyperplasia 56,
 autistic-type 2                                172
1
1
Ileum 12, 13, 33                              Malabsorption 2, 19, 20, 2 1, 22, 33,
Immune reaction 47                             39, 41, 45, 48, 56, 57, 62, 64, 65,
Immune response 38.39                          66, 182
   adaptive 58                                Malnutrition 13, 24, 25, 34
   innate 58                                  Maltase 25
Immune system 13, 20, 21, 57                  Maltose 24, 27, 28, 29, 57, 161
Immunological disease                         McCarrison, Dr. R. 9
   food allergy ii, 47                        Meat ii, 64, 73
Infant formula                                 processed 73
   disaccharide free 161                       processed meats 73
Infections                                    Medication 64, 65
   parasitic 8, 25, 41                        Membranes, intestinal cell 38
   respiratory 70                              (see Chapter 5)
Inflammatory bowel disease i, 14, 19,         Memory, poor 46
    54, 168                                   Mental disorders 46
Intestinal flora i, iii, 11, 47               Metchnikoff, Dr. I. 14, 15
Intestinal lumen 25, 26                       Microbes, microbial, microorganisms
Intestinal mucosa (surface) 8                     9, 10,25,26,30,45,47,48,51,
  injury 19, 21, 25, 26, 38                       56, 57, 59
Intestine, surgical shortening 47, 48             (see Chapter 3, 4)
  invasion 11, 20, 26                      Peristalsis 13, 16
  products (toxins, intestinal toxicity)   Poley, Dr. J.R. 8
     ii, 9, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 26,    Polysaccharides 3, 28
     33, 48, 51, 57                        Potatoes 6, 7, 24, 27, 28, 53, 63, 74
Microscope 40, 41                          Predigested carbohydrates 8, 10
Microvilli, intestinal 22, 24, 25, 28,     Proteins 5, 26, 28, 34.37, 40, 43, 54,
  29,56, 174                                 55, 57, 73
Milk6, 11, 17,27,32,47,62,63,66,           Protein-starch complex 39
  76, 78                                   Psoriasis iii
 acidified 15                              Psychiatric disorders 45
 acidophilus 76, 157                       Psychosis 46.47
 fermented 15, 76                          Q
  intolerance to cow's milk protein 8,     Quinoa 67, 74
     25,41                                 R
Milk-free diet 2, 5
Millet 67, 74                              Relapse 5, 34, 36, 40, 70
Minerals                                   Rice 6, 28,32, 40, 67, 74
 supplementation 65, 66, 172               Rye 37,38,67, 74, 80
Monosaccharides 3, 7, 27, 62, 79           S
Morin, Dr. C.L. 7                          Schizophrenia 2, 45, 46.47.49
Mucosa (see Intestinal mucosa)             Seaweed 74
Mucus 5, 8, 9, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 33      Seizures 33, 46, 49
N                                          Small intestinal surface 8, 20, 21, 24,
Nervous system 33, 45, 46, 57                25, 26, 41, 42, 43
Nervous tissue 45                          Smoking 7
Neurological disorders 45, 48, 52          Soft drinks 77, 78
  attention deficit disorder (ADD) 52      Soy 27,38, 74, 77
  autism (see Chapter 8)                     products 40, 64
  epilepsy 46, 49, 52                        soy protein intolerance 25, 41
Neurosis 47                                  Spastic colon 70
Night terrors 2                            Specific Carbohydrate Diet 10, 16, 18,
                                               19,20,21,27,28,30,36,37,42,
  (see seizures, delirium)
Nuts 28.30, 61, 64, 75, 77                    43,49
Nystatin 54                                   (see Chapter 1, 8)
                                           Spelt 74
0                                          Sprue, tropical 24, 25, 41
Oats 40, 67, 74                            Squash 63,74,81
Organic acids 18, 19, 55                   Starch core 39
P                                          Starch(es) 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 19, 21, 22,
Pancreas 22, 28, 29                          24,32, 37,38,39, 47, 55, 57, 62,
  (also see Cystic fibrosis of the           63, 64, 65, 67, 73, 75, 78, 174
     pancreas)                                (see Chapter 5)
Paralysis 45                               Steatorrhea 4 1
Parasitic infections 8, 25, 41             Stimmy 53
Parsnips 74                                Sucrase 25
Peanuts 75                                 Sucrose 3, 6, 7, 8, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28,
Peas                                         57, 73, 78, 79, 183
  chick 27, 74                             Sugars 5, 6, 7, 8, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27,
  split 27, 73                               42,47, 55,57,62, 63, 64, 65, 67,
Pellagra 24                                  70, 73, 174, 182, 184
                                         Index


  (see Chapter 1, 10)                       Worms 4 1
Sulfa drugs 1, 16                           Y
Sulfites 75                                 Yams 28.63, 74
Sweat test for CF                           Yeast 9, 10, 13, 24, 26, 47, 54.57, 64
  sodium            in perspiration         Yoghurt 3, 15, 27, 61, 62, 63, 66, 69,
Sweeteners, artificial                        73, 76, 157
  aspartame, (Nutri-Sweet, etc.) 77
  saccharin 62, 74, 76, 77, 80
  sorbit0162
  xylitol 62
Synthetic diet (see Elemental diet)
T
Thrush, oral 26
Tofu 64
Toxicity, intestinal iii, 14, 15, 24, 33,
  38, 39, 46, 47
Toxins, microbial (yeast and
  bacterial)
   (see Toxicity)
Triticale 67, 74
Truss, Dr. C.O. 47
u
Ulcerative colitis 1, 5, 6, 7, 14, 19,
  25, 26, 41, 46, 48, 56, 70, 163,
  165
v
Vagus nerve 57
Van Eys, Dr. 1. 8
Vegetables 3, 27, 28, 29, 30,36, 60,
  61, 63, 64, 69, 73, 74, 76, 170
Vegetarian diet 64
Vitamin A 65, 161
Vitamin B12 13, 24, 64, 65
Vitamin B-Complex 65, 67, 182
Vitamin C 65
Vitamin D 65, 67
Vitamin E 161
Vitamins 2 1
  deficiency 24
  folic acid 24, 65
  supplement 64, 65, 66, 182
Von Brandes, Dr. J.W. 6
W
Weight gains 2, 8,50, 53, 169
Weight loss 5, 34
Wheat 37, 38,39, 67, 74, 182
Wheat germ 74
Whey 28, 64, 73, 78,80, 180, 182,
 183, 184
                          ORDER FORM
               BREAKING THE VICIOUS CYCLE


                                                             TOTAL
CANADA                                                     TO ENCLOSE
     Price per each book
     Add $4.50 for postage
     and handling for 1 book
     (Add $.50 for postage
     and handling for each
     additional book.)
                                          GST 7% (Tax)


USA (Continental)
      Price per each book
      Add $4.50 for postage
      and handling for 1 book
      (Add $.50 for postage
      and handling for each
      additional book.)



Complete the following:
                   $                  Total price for each book
KIRKTON PRESS LTD.                    plus handling, shipping,
396 Grills Road                       as indicated above
R.R. #2
Baltimore, Ontario                        Number of volumes ordered
CANADA KOK 1CO
Tel905-349-3443
Fax 905-349-3420   $                  TOTAL ENCLOSED
Name:
Address:
City, State or Province and Postal Code
ABOUT THE
AUTHOR.                 ..
E    laine Gottschall, B.A., M.Sc. received her
     Bachelor's degree from the Department of Biology
 at Montclair State College, Montclair, N.J. in 1973
 where she graduated Magna Cum Laude. She entered
 the Department of Graduate Studies in Nutrition at
 Rutgers, the New Jersey State University in New
 Brunswick that same year.
     In 1975, Mrs. Gottschall moved to Canada and
that year became a member of the Department of Cell
Science at The University of Western Ontario's Zoology
Department. She spent four years there investigating
the effects of various sugars on the digestive tract
working mainly on the cellular level. She obtained a
Master of Science degree in that Department in 1979.
Results of her work are published in the journal, Acta
Anatornica 123:178 (1985).
     For the year following, Mrs. Gottschall worked in
the Department of Anatomy of The University of
Western Ontario investigating the changes that occur
in the bowel wall in inflammatory bowel disease.
     Her main interests have been the effect of food on
the functioning of the digestive tract, as well as on
behavior.
