                               ADVANCE PRAISE FOR FIBER FUELED

“Will is Dr. Fiber! Get on the fiber train and transform your health from the inside out, literally. . . . Poop
like a champ, build an immune system that is a fortress, and feed your brain premium-grade fuel. Pick up a
copy of Fiber Fueled today!”
                                —Rip Esselstyn, New York Times bestselling author of The Engine 2 Diet
“This book is a timely and authoritative discussion of the overwhelming scientific evidence supporting the
health benefits of a largely plant based diet. It focuses on the role of fiber, a key element of plant-based
diets, and presents this ancient wisdom from the perspective of modern microbiome science. A must-read
for everybody still unconvinced about the best diet to stay healthy.”
               —Emeran A. Mayer, MD, PhD, author of The Mind-Gut Connection and Distinguished
         Professor of Medicine, Physiology and Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
“The gut microbiome is the engine that drives the body to health and today’s diet is deficient in its preferred
fuel: fiber, the elixir of life. Instead, we are overfed, undernourished, and overmedicated. Fiber Fueled is a
must-have owner’s manual revealing the secrets for gut and total body health. Read Dr. Will Bulsiewicz’s
groundbreaking book today!”
                   —Gerard E. Mullin, MD, MS, author of The Gut Balance Revolution and Director of
                                         Integrative GI Nutrition Services, Johns Hopkins Medicine

“Like the microbes in our gut, Dr. Bulsiewicz helps us digest a large quantity of complex material. Fiber
Fueled translates the latest cutting-edge science of the gut microbiome into accessible and practical
information. This is required reading whether you are interested in a heathier gut and body or learning about
one of the most transformational fields in biomedicine.”
                 —Justin Sonnenburg, PhD, author of The Good Gut and Associate Professor, Stanford
                                                                                        University

“If ‘all disease begins in the gut’ as Hippocrates said, then all health begins there too. Dr. Bulsiewicz and
the Fiber Fueled 4 Week Plan are the natural jumpstart to feeding our gut its preferred and premium fuel.
This book is the answer for so many of my patients searching for a higher level of wellness.”
          —Joel Kahn, MD, FACC, author of The Plant-Based Solution and Clinical Professor, Wayne
                                                             State University School of Medicine
“Drawing on his vast experience as a practicing gastroenterologist, Dr. Bulsiewicz illuminates a path to
optimal gut health using ‘food as medicine’ to unleash the incredibly powerful, absolutely fascinating, and
wildly underrated postbiotics called short-chain fatty acids. It’s worked for him, it’s worked for his patients,
and it can work for you too.”
              —Mahmoud A. Ghannoum, PhD, MBA, author of Total Gut Balance and Director of the
                                Center for Medical Mycology, Case Western Reserve University

“Although I’ve actively investigated intestinal bacterial functions my entire career, I found Dr. B’s Fiber
Fueled book both highly informative and inspiring. It brings fresh perspectives and very practical solutions
to vexing clinical problems that can be reversed and prevented by incorporating the lifelong healthy eating
patterns described in this transformative book.”
             —R. Balfour Sartor, MD, Co-Director, Center for Gastrointestinal Biology and Disease,
       Midget Distinguished Professor of Medicine, Microbiology & Immunology, University of North
                                                                     Carolina School of Medicine
“Fiber Fueled is what happens when you combine almost two decades of medical training, an unrivaled
passion for helping people live healthier, and an incredible ability to break down complex science into easy-
to-digest information for everyone to access. Far more than a diet book—a true master class in gut health
that will be hard to put down.”
        —Simon Hill, master’s of nutrition, host of the Plant Proof Podcast, and author of The Proof Is
                                                                                           in the Plants
“At a time when many ‘experts’ are peddling the latest fad diets, Americans are justifiably confused about
what to eat. Will has used his considerable skills to provide an engaging, evidence-based guide that makes it
clear that when you optimize your gut microbiota through diet and lifestyle, you also improve your health.”
        —Nicholas J. Shaheen, MD, MPH, Chief of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Bozymski-Heizer
              Distinguished Professor of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of Medicine
“Gastroenterologists should focus on diet and lifestyle to prevent and reverse disease and only use pills and
procedures when these less invasive interventions fail. Dr. Bulsiewicz provides an excellent blueprint in his
book, Fiber Fueled, for a more patient-centered approach to improve overall health.”
               —John Pandolfino, MD, MSCI, Chief of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Hans Popper
                                                  Professor of Medicine, Northwestern University

“After many decades of physiological studies evaluating how the GI system works in health and disease, it
is only in the last decade that food, fiber, diet, and the microbiome has found its proper scientific place.
Using his extensive experience, Dr. Bulsiewicz has compiled this new knowledge into a clear and concise
book so that readers having GI illness or who are in health can truly benefit.”
          —Douglas A. Drossman, MD, Drossman Gastroenterology, President Emeritus and COO of
      the Rome Foundation, and Professor Emeritus of Medicine and Psychiatry, University of North
                                                                    Carolina School of Medicine
“We live in a country where most people eat twice the recommended daily allowance of protein and almost
no one is eating the recommended fiber. Many think that because we do not absorb fiber it cannot be
important. Dr. Bulsiewicz combines his firsthand knowledge with the available science to teach the reader
the importance of eating varied forms of fiber to feed our varied forms of bacteria residing in our gut, and in
turn improve and prevent both systemic diseases and gut pathology. And if you think your gut just can’t
tolerate fiber, do not fear. The good doctor has a whole chapter dedicated to helping you get over bloating
and other symptoms commonly associated with high-fiber diets.”
              —Garth Davis MD, author of Proteinaholic and bariatric surgeon & Medical Director of
                                 Weight Management, Mission Hospital, Asheville, North Carolina

“In a world where most people are obsessed about consuming a lot of protein, this book will revolutionize
the way you think about nutrition. In this evidence-based book, Dr. B delineates the importance of fiber for
great gut health. I recommend for everyone to read this book as great health begins in your gut.”
                                                   —Angie Sadeghi, MD, author of The Trifecta of Health
an imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
penguinrandomhouse.com




Copyright © 2020 by Will Bulsiewicz
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech,
and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying
with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without
permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
ISBN 9780593084564
Ebook ISBN 9780593084571
The recipes contained in this book are to be followed exactly as written. The publisher is not responsible for
your specific health or allergy needs that may require medical supervision. The publisher is not responsible
for any adverse reactions to the recipes contained in this book.
Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the individual
reader. The ideas, procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a substitute for
consulting with your physician. All matters regarding your health require medical supervision. Neither the
author nor the publisher shall be liable or responsible for any loss or damage allegedly arising from any
information or suggestion in this book.
pid_prh_5.5.0_c0_r0
   I lost my dad during the preparation of this book. It was sudden and completely unexpected.

I couldn’t wait to share this book with him. It would have been easy to just send an electronic copy,
  but I really wanted his first read to be a physical book, with the hardcover, all the pages, and his
                                        son’s name on the front.

Over the past few months, my dad repeatedly told me how proud he was of me. He told me that my
grandparents John and Helen Bulsiewicz would have been so proud of the work I was doing in the
        name of our family. I can’t tell you how much it means to me that he said all that.

It breaks my heart that he’s not here anymore. I am who I am because of him. But I will forever be
                           grateful for the special times that we shared.

                Love you, Dad. Will always be thinking of you. This book is for you.
Contents


      Author’s Note
      Introduction
  PART I. KNOWLEDGE IS POWER
     1. The Engine that Drives Human Health Isn’t Even Human
     2. Twenty-First-Century Life: Overfed, Undernourished, and Hyper-
     medicated
     3. The Fiber Solution: Short-Chain Fatty Acids and Postbiotics for the
     Win
  PART II. THE FIBER FUELED APPROACH
     4. Eat the Rainbow to Find Your Pot of Gold
     5. Finding Your Plant Passion with a Sensitive Gut
     6. Fermentation Nation Rising
     7. Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Postbiotics
     8. The Fiber Fueled Foods
  PART III. THE FIBER FUELED PLAN
     9. Fiber Fueled 365: The Lifestyle
     10. The Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
      Acknowledgments
      Index
Author’s Note


Dear Friends,
   My goal with this book is to send you off on a journey that transforms your
life. I want you healthier and happier, and I truly believe that the words on these
pages will guide you to that better place.
   There was only one way to accomplish my goal, and that was to make this
book a celebration of scientific discovery. We want the laws of nature working
for us, not against us. Science becomes the compass that guides us to that better
place. I share this because you will read this book and hopefully find it
lighthearted and entertaining, but just know that if you pulled back the curtain
you’d discover more than six hundred studies backing up those words.
Legitimate, valid science is the reason accomplished scientists and doctors are
unified in support of this book. You can review all of my references plus more
details about my evidence-based approach at www.theplantfedgut.com/research.
   With that said, being Fiber Fueled isn’t a quick fix or a diet; it’s a lifestyle
trajectory that heals. In some cases, those lifestyle choices are optimal when
personalized to your needs and bio-individuality. Therefore, the implementation
of the practices in this book should be done under the guidance of a qualified
health professional to ensure that your specific needs are being met.
   Additionally, some of you may want to continue the conversation with me
after reading this book or seek additional resources, and I welcome and celebrate
that. Please join me at www.theplantfedgut.com, where you will find my
podcasts, blog posts, social media channels, free email subscription, and online
course that will allow you to go beyond the book.
   Onward to health and happiness together!
Introduction


Leslie came into my office worn out and exasperated. She was thirty-six years
old, but she felt like she was pushing eighty. She was overweight, a trend that
started in her late twenties while taking the antibiotic minocycline for her acne.
She struggled daily with fatigue, sluggishness, insomnia, and lack of motivation.
Her skin was broken out, her hair was thinning, and she had persistent loose
stools. On top of all this was her extensive list of medical ailments: irritable
bowel, type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, autoimmune thyroiditis, depression, and
anxiety.
   After seeing several other GI doctors, a chiropractor, a hormone specialist,
and an expensive cash-only functional doctor, she was confused and frustrated
by the conflicting recommendations. Here she was at thirty-six, on four different
medications with ten supplements to boot. “This isn’t the life I envisioned for
myself,” she told me on that first visit. “I’m way too young to be feeling this
old.”
   Much of her frustration stemmed from not knowing what to eat. What should
have been simple had become so complicated. She had gone Paleo in her late
twenties to combat weight gain and she soon progressed to the Whole 30. She
felt better for a short time on those diets, but when the weight gain and fatigue
slowly started to creep back in, she desperately searched for a new diet solution
and tried eliminating phytates and lectins. She’d been gluten-free for almost ten
years and by the time I saw her in my office, she had completely eliminated
grains, legumes, dairy, and nightshades. Her diet now consisted mostly of
arugula, avocado, grass-fed meat, and bone broth, with very little variation. At
times she’d test herself with some beans or whole-wheat bread, but she’d
experience gas and bloating, which the diet gurus she was following warned was
proof of inflammation.
    “It is maddening to follow all the experts’ recommendations religiously and
do exactly as I’m told, only to feel worse than ever and see my weight fluctuate
like a yo-yo!” she exclaimed. With each progressive elimination, she’d see at
most short-term improvement, only to slide back into the same exhaustive
pattern. The last straw came when she tried the ketogenic diet to lose weight, but
it just made her diarrhea worse and it was now a bigger problem than ever.
    At this point in our conversation, she was physically slumped forward, elbows
on her knees, staring at the ground, eyes welled up with tears. I pulled my chair
closer to hers and leaned in so we were on the same eye level.
    “Leslie, it’s going to be all right. We’re going to get you better.” She looked
up, a glimmer of hope in her eye. “I totally get your frustration. This is the most
confusing time in human history for people who just want to get better. Too
many experts saying too many different things. I need you to trust me. If you’re
with me, then this is rock bottom right here, right now. Today is a fresh start for
you with a new approach that makes you feel better and restores the real version
of yourself that has been missing these last few years.”
    Over the following months, Leslie and I worked closely together to make
some major changes. We took her off most of her supplements and slowly
reintroduced diversity back into her diet. Foods that she had been told were off-
limits were brought back at the right time, in the right amount. She began to
really enjoy her food for the first time in years. The restrictive diet had been
challenging, boring, and futile for her. She got rid of her bone broth and tapered
down on her animal product consumption while increasing fruits, veggies, and
even whole grains. Artificial sweeteners and processed foods stayed on the
sideline. Beans came back on the menu! And while the process wasn’t always
easy, we worked through it together.
    Front and center in her new way of eating was fiber-rich plants—fruit,
veggies, whole grains, beans, and legumes. Why fiber? Because as you’re about
to learn in this book, fiber is the heart and soul of true gut healing, and true gut
healing leads to better health in everything from your cardiovascular system to
your brain health to your hormonal health. It’s really that powerful.
    When Leslie emerged on the other side and settled into her new approach, she
was beaming with energy. She was having fun experimenting with all the new
foods that she’d previously eliminated. She now knew exactly which foods she
was sensitive to and was able to include them in her diet on a regular basis by
simply being careful with portion size. Twelve pounds had melted away.
Meanwhile, getting Fiber Fueled reversed Leslie’s diabetes and dramatically
dropped her cholesterol. She was able to reduce the dosage of her thyroid
medication, and she was back to having normal bowel movements. Best of all,
she felt like herself again: alive, optimistic, and excited for the possibilities
ahead of her.
   Getting Fiber Fueled can help you with whatever you’re struggling with, too,
whether it’s weight gain, hormone imbalances, digestive issues, or you just want
to feel better in your own skin. I know this because I’ve seen it in Leslie and in
hundreds of my own patients. Now it’s your turn.



The Fiber Fueled program
Perhaps you’re one of the many Americans suffering with digestive issues:
heartburn, abdominal pain, gas and bloating, diarrhea or constipation. I know
there are at least seventy million of you out there because I personally published
that statistic in Gastroenterology, the top American journal in my field, just a
few years ago. Without question, gut health starts with the foods that you eat.
Unfortunately much of the advice being offered by popular “experts” is dead
wrong. I’ve grown tired of watching bone broth and grass-fed meat be touted as
gut healing. There’s not a single study to support that, not even a crappy one.
Instead of offering recommendations based on trends and pseudoscience, my
program offers you a scientifically validated approach that will truly heal your
gut by restoring order to your gut microbiome.
   Do you have a sensitive stomach? Do you have trouble processing certain
foods, like beans, broccoli, and gluten-containing grains? Food sensitivity has
become a major issue worldwide, with an estimated 20 percent of the world’s
population suffering from some form of food intolerance. I see it every single
day in my clinic, and I’m going to share with you the strategy I’ve devised for
my own patients to help identify exactly which foods they are sensitive to. I’ll
also share my easy, step-by-step plan for how to reintroduce those foods to
eliminate the sensitivity and get back to enjoying them again.
   If you’re one of the millions of Americans who have an autoimmune disease,
then this book is for you, too. Seventy percent of the immune system resides in
the gut, literally just a single layer of cells separating it from the microbiota. It’s
hard to separate the two—they rise and fall together. By optimizing your gut
microbes, we can help get your immune system back on track.
   Do you or someone you love have heart disease, cancer, a history of stroke, or
Alzheimer’s disease? These are just a few of the dangerous and all-too-common
conditions that can improve with this plan. The Fiber Fueled approach doesn’t
just benefit digestive disorders. In fact, this is literally the only diet plan that’s
been scientifically proven to actually reverse heart disease.
   Maybe you consider yourself pretty healthy and just want to stay that way.
That’s the situation I’m in as well. I haven’t always been in great shape, but right
now, by practicing what I preach, I feel fantastic. I’ve lost nearly fifty pounds,
I’m back to my college weight, and I feel like I’ve actually reversed the aging
process. There’s real science to support that. This is the only dietary approach
shown to lengthen telomeres, which is the part of our cells that cause aging as
they get shorter. Longer telomeres have been suggested to indicate slow aging
and reduced risk of heart disease, cancer, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s.
   You’re going to learn in this book that you are one of a kind with a gut
microbiome as unique as a fingerprint. So there is no one-size-fits-all when it
comes to diet. Something that works for another person may not work for you,
and that’s driven by the individual nature of your gut microbiome. But if you’ll
treat me like your doctor, mentor, and lifestyle coach, I’ll walk you through a
program that will be personalized and tailored to your unique needs and
ultimately guide you to the vibrant health that you deserve.
   This book is the consummation of everything I’ve learned about gut health
during the two decades that I’ve been grinding to become the best doctor I can
possibly be. With the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks (see Chapter 10), I’ll show you how
to use a healthy diet, lifestyle, and high-quality supplements to address the root
cause of your problems. This isn’t just a treatment plan; it’s a way of life that
will help you discover your healthiest self. Your symptoms will dissipate, your
doctor will be shocked when your medicine ends up in the trash, and you’ll
enjoy the vibrant health you’ve always wanted.



Sadly, I must admit that our health care system has failed you
When I was younger, it drove me nuts when people would say that health care in
America sucks. I definitely took it personally. You have to understand, for
sixteen years I toiled, sacrificed, and committed every last ounce of energy that I
had to that “sucky” health care system. I took out huge loans so that I could go to
Vanderbilt for undergrad and Georgetown for medical school. I worked six days
a week, at work before sunrise and home after sunset, for what I calculated was
less than minimum wage after medical school. My family would be off on
vacation together, and I’d be on call in the hospital wearing the same boxer
shorts I wore yesterday because I was too tired to do my laundry. (For the
record, I don’t do that anymore!)
   But now I get it. There’s a reason why the United States is ranked forty-third
in the world in life expectancy. We have a health care system that’s great at
identifying problems once they exist and then trying to manage them with a
combination of pills and procedures. Sure, we can improve symptoms or slow
disease progression in some cases, but it always comes at a cost. It’s sick care,
not health care. There is little to no focus on prevention.
   What we’re missing is an acknowledgment that a couple of milligrams of
medicine will never be able to overcome the effect of what we eat. Each of us
consumes an average of three pounds of food per day. Keeping the math simple,
that’s one thousand pounds of food per year, meaning we’ll each consume about
eighty thousand pounds of food during our lifetimes. Somehow, our medical
system doesn’t want to acknowledge that these eighty thousand pounds of food
matter, but I’m telling you right now: a few milligrams of medicine will never be
more important than the eighty thousand pounds of food you eat. When we wait
for disease to manifest, we’ve already missed our greatest opportunity. As
Benjamin Franklin said, “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.”
   Simply put, the greatest determinant of your health during your lifetime is the
food that you choose to eat. As it turns out, your diet is also the greatest
determinant of the health of your microbiome. In other words, you could nourish
your body with life-giving food and reap the rewards of better health. Or you can
punish your body with poisons disguised as food that actually take health away
with every bite.
   Unfortunately, our health care system simply ignores the role of nutrition in
health and disease. Consider medical education in the United States. Medical
students spend months learning the nuances of drug pharmacology, but formal
nutrition training can be just two weeks or less. For me, that training occurred
during my second year of medical school. It would be more than ten years later
that I would finally complete all of my training to be a licensed
gastroenterologist. And during that entire ten years, it was never mentioned
again.
   And did you know that even if I provide nutritional counseling, there’s no way
for me as a gastroenterologist to bill for the time that I use to do that? Look, I’m
not telling you this to say, “Pay me more!” I’m telling you this to say that our
system actually penalizes doctors for taking the time to discuss nutrition. I’ll use
my office as an example. We currently have three doctors and about fifteen
employees. That means that I am personally responsible for covering the salaries
of five individuals before I see even a dime. So uncompensated time becomes
rather costly. Sadly, this creates a major deterrent to most doctors incorporating
nutrition into their practice.
   For me, I’ve built a successful career by forgetting the money and the rules
and just doing what’s best for my patients. When I finished my training and went
into practice for the first time, my patients would ask me fairly intuitive
questions. “Dr. B., what should I eat so I don’t get so much gas?” “Hey, Doc,
what’s the best food to prevent diarrhea?” “So I was wondering, can diet help
me control my ulcerative colitis?” I have a strong, intrinsic motivation to provide
the very best care for each person who walks through my office door, and I just
couldn’t stand having a patient ask me something like this and not be able to
provide an answer.
   While I was searching for answers to these questions in my medical texts, a
series of events in my personal life were leading me to conclusions about the
role diet plays in our health that frankly shocked me. What I discovered was eye
opening—and as a result I was motivated to completely change my approach to
medicine and break free from the status quo, setting me on a mission to spread
this message of truth. I will not stop. It’s too important, and people urgently need
to hear this.



My personal path to better health
I’m the guy who always has a five- and a ten-year plan and believes that it’s all
going to come to fruition. But never in a million years did I think that I’d one
day be an advocate for plant-based gut health. To understand why, you have to
understand my background.
   I was raised on the standard American diet. Nothing against my parents: I
think this is how most kids were raised in the early ’80s. It was normal in our
house to eat Doritos and drink Purplesaurus Rex Kool-Aid every single day.
Convenience reigned supreme. There were a lot of SpaghettiOs with Meatballs,
Chef Boyardee Ravioli, and frozen burritos.
   In high school, my parents were divorced and my mom worked full-time. My
brothers and I would come home from school, fire up the propane grill, and have
a few hot dogs. I became a hot dog connoisseur. Nathan’s Famous and Hebrew
National were the top brands, although if you could get your hands on the local
Hofmann brand hot dogs, that was next level.
   Now, before I go any further, I’d like to take a step back and honor my mom,
who was an incredible parent and worked tirelessly to provide for our family. To
her credit, she was pretty diligent about reminding us to eat more fruits and
vegetables. Being the typical teenage boy, I not only rejected this notion but
actually prided myself on pushing the limits of what my body was capable of
consuming on the opposite end of the spectrum. I had that sense of invincibility
that most of us have at that age. I felt like I could eat anything I wanted and was
immune to any consequences.
   My poor eating continued. My college diet at Vanderbilt was predominantly
cold-cut sandwiches from Jersey Mike’s and Jimmy John’s with a late-night
sprinkling of Wendy’s, Sonic, and Waffle House. I started drinking massive
quantities of soda to the point where it became a two-liter-per-day habit. During
medical school at Georgetown I was obsessed with Wisemiller’s Deli, which
was a short walk from campus. These two subs were the ultimate back then:


     Chicken madness: Mounds of grilled chicken breast, onions, sweet
     peppers, garlic, hot pepper, provolone cheese, bacon, lettuce, tomato, and
     mayonnaise. Wowza!
     Burger madness: Two quarter pounders with American cheese, bacon,
     grilled onions, lettuce, tomato, and mayonnaise. Make sure the bathroom’s
     close!


   Honestly, it’s incredible that I never had a heart attack. I had those two
sandwiches at least three times a week.
   This pattern of unapologetically eating poorly may seem cheeky or cute, but it
was taking a toll on my body. As I became busier with work, took less time for
exercise, and started to inch closer to age thirty, I began gaining weight, leaned
heavily on coffee to get me through the day, and generally felt unwell.
   Things came to a head during my year as chief medical resident at
Northwestern. All of my dreams were coming true professionally. Beyond being
selected as the chief medical resident, which is a huge honor, I had received all
the other major awards in our residency program. I was already the author of
eight scientific papers in the top gastroenterology journals and my mentors, two
of the most famous GI doctors in the country, Drs. John Pandolfino and Peter
Kahrilas, were touting me as the next great clinical investigator. Northwestern
was paying all of my expenses so that I could get a master’s degree in clinical
research, which I was doing in night school in addition to all my other
responsibilities.
   Everything from the outside seemed like it was going great, like off the charts
better than my wildest expectations. But on the inside I was miserable. I was
completely exhausted, overworked, and the invincible feeling of my younger
years was gone as my body started to change. My weight crept higher and higher
until I was nearly fifty pounds overweight. I didn’t like the way I looked or felt,
but I was too busy to do anything about it.
    It never crossed my mind that having dry-aged steaks at the Chicago
chophouses twice a week with the hospital bigwigs or grabbing chili cheese dogs
and Italian beef sandwiches on the way home wasn’t doing me any good. I was a
celebrated doctor at one of America’s elite medical institutions, and I had such
little awareness about nutrition that I was completely incapable of advising my
patients, let alone myself. In hindsight, of course, it’s obvious how unhealthy my
diet was. It’s not that I thought I was eating healthy. It’s more that this was
normal for me. I’d been eating this way for years, so why should I change things
now?
    The following year I moved to Chapel Hill for my gastroenterology
fellowship at the University of North Carolina, the top GI division in the
country. I stopped seeing patients for eighteen months and was completely
immersed in the world of clinical research as a cancer epidemiologist. During
this time I presented more than forty times at national meetings; I published
more than twenty papers in the top peer-reviewed journals in my field; I was
even selected to give the Presidential Plenary on the biggest stage at the biggest
international GI meeting of the year, Digestive Disease Week. With the help of
my amazing mentor, Dr. Nick Shaheen, we were shifting paradigms.
    While in Chapel Hill, I met my future wife, Valarie, and that’s when things
really changed. The way she ate was completely different from the way of
anyone I’d ever met. We’d go out to dinner at a nice restaurant, and there’d be a
menu filled with a myriad of steaks, chops, poultry, and seafood, but she would
get the vegetable plate. Huh? I kept it to myself, but on the inside I had an
eyebrow raised. Honestly, I didn’t have any friends who were vegan or
vegetarian. This was a mind-boggling experience for me.
    But I couldn’t contend with the results. Val ate without restriction. She never
worried about portion size and yet never seemed to have issues controlling her
weight. She was smoking hot! (And still is.) Meanwhile I was over here
sweating out thirty-minute workouts plus a forty-five-minute run every day, and
physically strong but still carrying far more weight than I was comfortable with.
The way she ate made me curious, so I started to experiment at home without
telling her. At first it was making big smoothies with kale and berries that I
would do as a replacement for fast food. Immediately, I noticed that I didn’t
have that post-meal hangover where you’re just completely exhausted for two or
three hours. I loved the way I felt on those days—lighter, more energized,
stronger. I also noticed changes with my body—glowing skin, thicker hair,
thinner face. My clothes started to fit me differently. My mind had more stamina
for work. My mood was lifted and optimistic.
   I was feeling so good that I began to wonder why I’d never heard anything
about the benefits of a plant-based diet in my medical training. My assumption
was that there must not be any studies, that it must be empiricism. The advantage
of having a master’s degree in clinical investigation, doing an epidemiology
fellowship at the number two school of public health, and publishing more than
twenty scientific papers is that you don’t need someone else to interpret the
research for you. You do it yourself. So when I went to the medical literature, I
was absolutely shocked by what I found. There was a mountain of evidence to
support the way I was feeling. We’re not talking a few bad studies where the
truth was stretched or there were hyperbolic claims. I’m talking about study after
study providing a uniform, consistent result. Plants are good for our health.
   There’s so much to love about eating plants. They’re nutrient dense and
calorie poor, the ideal weight-loss combination. They have vitamins, minerals,
antioxidant compounds called polyphenols, and unique medicinal chemicals
only found in plant food called phytonutrients. But there’s one particular part of
the plant that absolutely stole my heart—FIBER. Everything I thought I knew
about fiber has been turned on its head, and I now legitimately believe that this is
the single most important missing piece in the American diet. As you’ll see in
this book, this isn’t your grandma’s fiber. This is the true gut health game
changer.
   As time went on I continued to make changes in my own life. It wasn’t an
overnight or radical change. These were small choices over the course of time
that were adding up—eliminating soda; cutting out fast food; adding in plant-
based smoothies, soups, and salads. Exploring different flavors of ethnic foods
that I hadn’t tried before—Indian, Thai, Vietnamese, and Ethiopian. I’m
drooling just thinking about them. As I was going through this exploratory phase
and making these changes, my body was changing, too. I couldn’t lose weight on
hour-long workouts when I ate poorly, but I was now so busy both
professionally and personally that I didn’t have time for exercise and the weight
was melting off. As I brought myself closer and closer to a fully plant-based diet,
I saw progress and improvements in my health and body. I was pescatarian for
several years, and when I gave up the fish, eggs, and dairy I lost another fifteen
pounds within a few months. I wasn’t restricting myself; I mean I was crushing
some serious food—diving face-first into delicious plant-based meals and barely
coming up for air. Meanwhile I was down to my college weight. Jeans that for
several years I had to jump off the bed to fit into needed a belt. And the belt
needed new holes. People were saying to me everywhere I went, “Have you lost
weight?” I was getting older in years, but apparently younger in appearance
because I increasingly was being questioned if I was really old enough to be a
doctor.
   When I (finally) went into practice for the first time after sixteen years as a
trainee, I was armed with a clinical skill set that had garnered me the top awards
in both residency and fellowship, elite research training that empowered me to
interpret the studies myself, and the wholehearted belief based upon the studies
I’d read and my own personal experience that diet and lifestyle were at the root
of all health and disease. Add to that my innate drive to provide my patients with
the best care regardless of the money or the rules, and what came from that is a
formula that blends the best of Western medicine with a scientifically validated
nutrition and lifestyle approach.
   The most shocking part for me was how well it worked. I shouldn’t have been
so surprised, since I’d experienced the benefits firsthand and seen the powerful
science in the studies. I truly believed that if I could have just one patient make
these lifestyle changes, then I’d done more good than if I treated an entire
month’s worth of patients with medicine. But the crazy part is, hundreds of my
patients were making lifestyle modifications. Even by just making small
adjustments, they were seeing a difference. But the ones who made me truly
excited were those who made radical changes. I was as excited as they were as I
watched them transform into the healthy, vibrant people they had always wanted
to be.
   As I witnessed this happen time and again, I began to feel an increasing sense
of urgency to share this message of plant-based gut health. It wasn’t enough to
share this story with my patients behind closed doors. Everyone deserved to hear
this truth and to be given the opportunity to transform their life for the better.
The world needs this healing!
   I’d witnessed the confusion that the internet and so-called gut experts had
created by promoting messages that were on trend but completely lacking any
scientific basis. I’d seen far too many patients harm their bodies with the latest
fad diet. These were well-intentioned people who were motivated to improve
their health and willing to make lifestyle changes to make it happen. But
unfortunately the advice they were being fed by the system was failing them.
They were told, “Do this and you’ll be better,” only they weren’t better. They
were worse. The philosophy of “eliminate the symptoms by eliminating the
food” was not only failing them, it was giving many of them an eating disorder.
Some just orthorexia, but I’ve seen numerous cases of full-blown anorexia
nervosa start with commitment to a restrictive diet. And as I watched, the entire
popular conversation on gut health was building momentum yet missing the
most important point—that it’s the plants in your diet that fuel a healthy gut.
   So I decided to create an Instagram account, which I titled @theguthealthmd,
to share my message on a broader scale. Completely new to social media, I had
no idea what to expect. Through word of mouth, a few podcast appearances, and
a profile piece by our local newspaper, I began to get a steady stream of new
followers to my account. Messages began pouring in from people all over the
world, telling me about the improvements they were seeing in their lives through
making the adjustments I recommended. I heard stories of people who were
losing weight, able to come off medications, and feeling better than they had in
years.
   I soon realized that it wasn’t enough. In order to give people the opportunity
to really make lasting change and transform their lives, I needed to share the
entire step-by-step plant-based gut health program that I was using with my
patients in my clinic. That became the book you are holding in your hands right
now.
   I want to welcome you to the start of an exciting, transformative journey. I’ve
seen the results from this program time and time again in my own patients, and
now you can experience those results for yourself. As you follow this program,
you will optimize your microbiome, eliminate cravings, strengthen your immune
system, improve energy levels, and resolve digestive issues. This is not a fad or a
diet; this is a lifestyle that empowers you to better health. With a “health
mindset,” you will effortlessly level up with healthy habits and your gut
microbes will rejoice as they thrive on being Fiber Fueled.




To view the 4 scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
PART I
         KNOWLEDGE IS POWER
                                                                                  1
The Engine that Drives Human Health Isn’t
Even Human
                   You’ve got friends in low places—trillions of them!




When I graduated medical school in 2006, we knew next to nothing about the
gut microbiota. At that time 60 percent of gut microbes did not grow on a
traditional culture plate, so we really didn’t have a way to study them. We knew
they existed but didn’t have a way to extract any intel on them. And honestly, we
weren’t losing any sleep over it. I mean, we’re talking about the bacteria in our
poop! Butt bugs! From our perspective, those scalawags were just along for the
ride and not necessarily playing an important role in our health.
   But things changed dramatically with a laboratory breakthrough in 2006 that
moved us past the culture plate and allowed us to peel apart the complex layers
of our gut microbiome and study them. Up to this point we only knew of about
two hundred species of bacteria that inhabited the human gut. Very quickly, we
identified fifteen thousand species and there are estimates now that there may be
as many as thirty-six thousand. Our barrier to research had been removed and the
floodgates opened. Since then there’s been an absolute explosion of science,
with 12,900 papers on the topic in the last five years alone. To put that number
into perspective, this represents a full 80 percent of the papers on the topic in the
last forty years.
   Maybe you’ve heard something about the importance of the gut microbiome,
but trust me, whatever you’ve read is just scratching the surface. All of this
science is coming at us incredibly fast, and admittedly it is a challenge for our
health care system to manage. It takes an average of seventeen years for new
findings to go from publication to being in the clinic or in the consciousness of
doctors, so most doctors are still functioning in the culture plate era. All have
heard of the microbiome, but for most they haven’t figured out how to include
this information in their clinical practice. But why wait? I’ve monitored the
emerging research with wide eyes and a gaping jaw and I’m ready to share it
with you right now. No seventeen-year wait.
   What we discovered when we learned to study gut bacteria is a shockingly
broad, expansive community of microorganisms that live inside us in harmony,
in balance, and with a purpose. We call this community the “gut microbiota.” If
we’re referring specifically to the genetic code of this community, then we use
the expression “microbiome.” There are five types of microorganisms residing
within you. They include bacteria, yeasts, parasites, viruses, and archaea.
   Bacteria are living single-celled organisms that most of us grew up fearing.
Believe it or not, our fears are strongly misplaced. Yes, there are some like E.
coli or Pseudomonas that are bad and create issues for us. But most are actually
good and are trying to help us. They’re like dogs. Most are man’s best friend, but
some you’d rather not reach out to pet. For those, you need a dog whisperer. But
if we’re talking about the gut microbiota, then you need someone like me, the
Poop Whisperer.
   Fungi are multicellular organisms that, similar to animals and plants, have a
nucleus and other organelles. They’re more sophisticated than bacteria but,
similar to bacteria, they are often thought to be bad even though many are trying
to help us. They also compete with bacteria, which means that there’s a zero-
sum game: if one is flourishing, then the other is withering.
   Viruses are tiny particles made up of DNA (or RNA) that don’t have a cell at
all and aren’t even considered to be living, even though they share some
qualities with us animate folk. Illnesses like influenza, HIV, and hepatitis B are
often the first to come to mind when we think of viruses, but not all viruses are
trying to hurt humans. In fact, most are an important part of the balanced gut
microbial community and are necessary to keep our bacteria in harmony.
   Parasites are nature’s thieves. They steal energy from the host and try to
remain undetected without offering any benefit. There are many types, ranging
from giardia to the “trich” (pronounced “trick,” a sexually transmitted infection)
to the terrifying worms that can be up to eighty feet long and give me the heebie-
jeebies. Thankfully, most parasites (such as those worms) are rare in the Western
world, although there are some that are more common than you’d expect. For
example, sixty million Americans are chronically infected with Toxoplasma
gondii and don’t know it because they are asymptomatic.
   And then there’s archaea, my personal favorite. These ancient organisms were
on our planet before oxygen even existed four billion years ago, and you’ll find
them miles deep in the ocean in rift vents or inside a volcano. You’ll also find
them chilling in the friendly comforts of your colon. The point here is that these
are resilient organisms. We’re just starting to learn about them, but, for what it’s
worth, they don’t seem to compete with the bacteria and fungi for energy so they
don’t appear to be manipulated by diet quite as easily as the other parts of our
microbiota.
   The depth of the gut microbiota is hard to fathom. It’s like trying to wrap your
mind around the Battle of Stalingrad in World War II where there were nearly
two million casualties in a single battle. The numbers are so astronomical that
you’re forced to ignore that each one was an individual, a real person. In this
case, we carry thirty-nine trillion microorganisms in our colons. Thirty-nine
trillion! Most of them bacteria.
   But don’t feel ashamed or grossed out by that—I mean, okay, it is kind of
gross, but I’m here to tell you that the bacteria in your gut and, as you’ll soon
see, in your bowel movements, too, are a wondrous, magical community with
amazing healing power. After all, even Ryan Gosling has bacteria in his colon.
How bad could they possibly be?
   So how many microbes is thirty-nine trillion? Imagine you are up in the
northern parts of Canada on a very clear night, and you can look up and see
literally every single star in the Milky Way. Take that number of stars and
multiply it by a hundred and that’s how many microorganisms are in your colon.
That number clearly outpaces the number of human cells in your body.
Depending on how you look at it, some would say you are only 10 percent
human—and 90 percent bacteria! You’re not just human, you’re a
superorganism that serves as an ecosystem for four of the six kingdoms of life:
Eubacteria, Fungi, Archaebacteria, and Protista. The other two are Animalia (us)
and plantae (what we eat). We are more than just human. We are the circle of
life.
   The human gut is all interconnected in a way that draws direct comparisons to
planet Earth. Your gut microbiome is just as much of an ecosystem as the
Amazon rain forest. It thrives on balance and harmony. In the jungle, all
animals, plants, and microbes exist with a purpose, even the mosquitoes and
snakes. They all bring something to that harmonious balance, and as much as I
hate mosquitoes and snakes, their loss would have unintended consequences and
diminish the health of that ecosystem. This is why biodiversity is critically
important to any ecosystem.
   The human gut microbiome is no exception. Diversity of species is critically
important to balance. Inside us are anywhere from three hundred to over a
thousand species of bacteria (out of the fifteen thousand to thirty-six thousand in
existence). When things are working the way they’re supposed to, we have a
diverse, abundant community of microbes living in harmony in our colon. The
colon itself is healthy and strong with an intact barrier of cells to keep everything
in its rightful place, and our microbiota plays its natural role as the workhorses
of human health.
   As residents of the intestines, it comes as no surprise that they are critically
involved in digestive function. They work in teams to unpack your food,
allowing you to extract the nutrients you need. There’s not a meal that goes by
that your microbes aren’t busy at work helping you to break down your food and
get the most out of it. It’s hard to fathom, but in many cases these single-celled
organisms are better at digesting our food than we are. As a result, we have
evolved to rely on them for that.
   Every single bite, all three pounds of food per day, flows downstream to your
gut microbes. They are not passive observers. Our food is also their food. Yes,
even invisible unicellular organisms need an energy source to fuel them. But not
every microbe eats the same food. Each dietary choice you make will empower a
specific group of microbes, while others will languish. If you permanently
remove a food group, the microbes that thrive on that food will starve into
extinction. They are procreating so quickly that the food choices you make in
twenty-four hours will alter the evolution of fifty generations of microbes. It
doesn’t take days or even weeks to change your microbes; it only takes one bite.
But you control what it is you bite into, and therefore you control the makeup of
your microbiome.
   The end result is a unique mix of microbes, as unique as a fingerprint. Those
microbes go to work on your food and things don’t end the way they started.
Microbial metabolism leads to biochemical transformation of the food. In many
cases, the healthy bacteria (let’s call them probiotic) will reward us by molding
our food into something that reduces inflammation and promotes health and
balance. We call the health-promoting compounds created by our microbes
postbiotics. But the opposite can also be true. Unhealthy food feeds unhealthy
microbes, and they punish us by creating compounds that inflame our body.
We’ll be talking about a few of these, such as TMAO (trimethylamine N-oxide),
in this book.
   Anything that you put into your mouth will be processed by these microbes,
including drugs. Which helps to explain why the same drugs can have a
lifesaving effect in one person and a life-threatening effect in another. For
example, the chemotherapy drug cyclophosphamide actually depends on gut
microbes to activate it. The healthier the gut, the better the chance at fighting off
cancer with this drug, according to a 2013 study published in Science.
   That’s not the only thing we rely on them for. What’s cool is that the health
effects extend far beyond the walls of the colon. If I were to boldly define the
entirety of human health, there would be five essential elements: immunity,
metabolism, hormonal balance, cognition, and gene expression. That would
cover our bases for everything we need to thrive as humans, and what’s amazing
is that the microbiota is intertwined with all five axes of human health. We’re
going to dive deeper into this, but let’s start by acknowledging the gut
microbiota as a command center of sorts for human health. Things happening
throughout the body, the heart and brain included, often have their origins in the
work of the gut microbes. They work as teams, but often with specialization.
   Imagine the gut as a factory staffed by workers with many different roles.
Each individual contributes his or her expertise toward the greater cause. And
yes, there will be overlap in terms of expertise. If you lose Sally the engineer,
but you replace her with Mark the engineer, you may find some differences in
how they work but that their similar skill set allows them both to accomplish the
required task. But if you lose an engineer and ask the conveyor belt operator to
fill in, what’s going to happen? Or what happens if instead of a range of
specialties like engineers, conveyor belt operators, woodworkers, welders, and
technicians, you just had every position staffed by sales reps? That’s when the
factory stops functioning well, signals get crossed, and things break down. In the
same way, when you lack diversity in your gut microbiome, mistakes happen in
those five major areas: immunity, metabolism, hormones, cognition, and gene
expression. It’s all interconnected, but at the heart of it is your gut microbiota.
   We use the term “dysbiosis” to refer to the loss of harmony and balance
within the gut. Damage or microbial disruption causes you to lose diversity and,
in the process, see a higher proportion of inflammatory microbes emerge. In
other words, the good stuff falls to the wayside, making more room for the not-
so-good stuff to flood your gut. This is problematic because now the colon wall
is no longer protected by a healthy community of anti-inflammatory bugs, and
the result is damage to the tight junctions holding the colon wall together and an
increase in intestinal permeability—some call this “leaky gut”—that leads to the
spillage of something called bacterial endotoxin into the bloodstream. This
bacterial endotoxin jumps on the vascular superhighway throughout the body,
and wherever it goes, it sets a fire (better known as inflammation). It’s bad news!
   Bacterial endotoxin is produced by evildoer bacteria like E. coli and
Salmonella and promotes inflammation that can range from smoldering and low-
grade all the way up to life-threatening sepsis, shock, and multi-organ failure.
Bacterial endotoxemia has been linked to a myriad of diseases including
autoimmunity, obesity, coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, type 2
diabetes, Alzheimer’s, alcoholic hepatitis, nonalcoholic fatty liver,
osteoarthritis . . . I could keep going.
   Sounds terrifying, but don’t be scared. The light always drowns out the
darkness. Let me give you an example. There’s a bacteria known as
Clostridiodes difficile, formerly known as Clostridium difficile (yes, like Prince
and Puff Daddy, apparently bacteria change their names, too), and often called
C. diff for short. C. diff is a pathogenic bacteria that can exist in the colon, even
in those who are healthy and living their best lives. In this setting, the healthy
gut bacteria outnumber the troublesome C. diff and are able to suppress it. Light
outshines the darkness.
   But if the gut is damaged and there aren’t enough good guys, C. diff
multiplies, becomes stronger, and causes colitis (severe inflammation of the
colon) with abdominal pain, fever, and explosive blood-drenched diarrhea. It’s
not pretty. This can progress to sepsis, a life-threatening response to infection
that can rapidly take even the healthiest of lives. When this is the case,
emergency surgery to remove the entire colon may be needed as a last-ditch
effort to get the infection out and save the person’s life.
   When I was in medical school in the early 2000s, we only saw C. diff in
hospitalized patients who were taking antibiotics. In retrospect we understand
that napalming the gut with antibiotics decimates the good bacteria, allowing the
antibiotic-resistant C. diff to rise up and dominate. Back then we didn’t fully
understand this, so we tried to treat the C. diff infection with, you guessed it,
another antibiotic. This worked for a while, but by around 2010 we were seeing
more and more cases of antibiotic failures. We also were seeing C. diff pop up in
a new group—young people who had never been on antibiotics and had never
been in the hospital. Things were changing so quickly that most of what I was
taught in medical school was outdated just a few years later. As antibiotic
effectiveness dwindled, we became increasingly desperate as a medical
community. Some people were requiring long-term treatment with antibiotics,
while the less fortunate were losing their colon or their life.
   But remember, the light drowns out the darkness. So in our time of
desperation, modern medicine turned to the most bizarre and humbling of places
—human stool. That’s not a typo, folks! Yes, we used poop as our treatment. It’s
called a fecal transplant, and it’s not as novel as it may seem. The earliest reports
are from ancient China more than fifteen hundred years ago. Turns out, when
you transfer the fecal microbiota of a heathy person into the colon of an
extremely sick person—or, in this specific example, when you douse the C. diff
with healthy poop—this vicious, drug-resistant infection reacts like the Wicked
Witch of the West after Dorothy threw the bucket of water on her. The C. diff
cries, “I’m melting, I’m melting,” and the person is cured—not just better, but
cured—in one or two days. I told you, the light drowns out the darkness. I’d call
it a miracle, except miracles aren’t supposed to be reproducible.
   So what is it about a fecal transplant that makes it so special? It’s actually
pretty simple: You are restoring balance to the gut microbiota. You’re putting
the right bacteria back to work in the factory. When you do that, they do their
job and immediately dominate and suppress the pathogenic C. diff, just like we
previously described happens in someone who is colonized but doesn’t have the
infection.
   “But isn’t my stool just waste from food digestion?” you may be asking.
Nope. Sixty percent of the weight of your stool is actually bacteria, both good
and bad. Sixty percent! It’s a snapshot of what your gut microbiota looks like.
Not a perfect snapshot, but it’s essentially a blend of bacteria from throughout
the colon. Even if you fast, you’d still produce stool because your gut microbiota
is constantly replicating and turning over.
   We all love a feel-good story, right? The comeback of the century, the
millennium even, is our stool. What was the least valuable thing on the planet
ten years ago has become the savior of modern medicine. People say, “Food is
medicine.” It’s true, but “Poop is medicine, too!” For generation after generation
we disparaged it with poop jokes when we should have been celebrating it, or at
least giving it a respectful tip of the cap. We didn’t realize that our stool was the
chariot carrying our celebrated gladiator, the gut microbiota. I’m not
exaggerating; I sincerely believe our bowel movements should be the sixth vital
sign. Body temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure, oxygen
saturation, and last (but not least) bowel movement quality. It really is a
powerful window into our health.
   My point here is that balance is absolutely critical to the gut flora and to every
part of your body that operates in communication with it. All those years that we
were trying to destroy the bad guys, all we needed to do was empower the good
guys. When that balance is in place, your gut microbiota is really, really good at
taking care of you. So powerful are the organisms in your gut that even in their
“waste” form they can heal someone who’s deathly ill.
   There’s no need to live in fear of the darkness when this book will help you
create the light. Rather than trying to destroy the bad guys, let’s work together to
empower the good guys, restore balance to our command center, and allow the
thirty-nine trillion workhorses to naturally enhance our immune system,
metabolism, hormonal balance, cognition, and gene expression.
The awesome power of our gut microbiota for total body health
A healthy, diverse gut microbiome does so much more than just suppress
pathogenic bacteria, process our drugs, and help us to process our food. It
operates as the command center for all five axes of human health. It’s bordering
on science fiction, but it’s absolutely true. I totally believe that all health and
disease starts in the gut. The awe-inspiring power in our microbiota makes me
reconsider my place on this planet. We, too, are a part of nature’s balance, and
inside us is this community that we need just as much as it needs us—we’re
better together! And when we take care of them, they take care of us.

     SYMPTOMS ASSOCIATED WITH DAMAGE TO THE GUT
     MICROBIOTA (DYSBIOSIS)
     INTESTINAL                                EXTRAINTESTINAL
     Abdominal pain or cramping                Weight gain
     Gas                                       Fatigue
     Bloating/abdominal distension             Brain fog
     Food sensitivities                        Difficulty concentrating
     Food allergies                            Mood imbalance
     Diarrhea                                  Anxiousness
     Constipation                              Skin breakouts
     Mucus in stool                            Joint pains or muscle aches
     Nausea                                    Weakness
     Indigestion                               Bad breath
     Heartburn/reflux                          Sinus congestion
     Belching                                  Shortness of breath/wheezing




Insights into the immune system from a toddler’s diaper
While most of us are stunned by the emergence of human waste as actual
medicine, someone who would probably not be so surprised by this revelation is
Professor David Strachan, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine. In 1989 Strachan proposed the hygiene hypothesis upon
observing that infants born into a household with more siblings were less
susceptible to eczema and allergic rhinitis. You may have heard of his
hypothesis—it’s the theory that excessive cleanliness is behind the explosion of
allergic and autoimmune disease. It’s why some families encourage their kids to
play in the dirt to benefit their immunity!
   Professor Strachan’s observations were a good start. But modern science is
now showing us that we need to take it a step further. The true problem is not so
much excessive cleanliness as it is damage and disruption of the healthy gut
microbiota. As I mentioned, a full 70 percent of the immune system lives in the
gut, separated from our microbiota by a single layer of cells that is a fraction of
the diameter of a hair and undetectable by the human eye. That single layer of
cells acts like a three-foot rickety wooden fence between two house parties—
with the immune system at one house and the microbiota at the other. The
parties may be separate, but they’re not really separated. They’re deeply
intertwined, feeding off each other’s energy, sharing drinks and laughs, in
constant communication with one another. Evidence has shown us that the
microbiota helps foster proper development of immune cells, identify invaders,
get immune cells to the needed location, and then enhance their infection-
fighting power. A healthy gut microbiota translates into an empowered, strong
immune system that optimally functions to identify a threat when it exists—
infectious or even malignant—and eradicate it. You can’t separate the gut
microbiota from the immune system. If you hurt one, you will hurt the other.
   Evidence for the gut-immune relationship comes from the autoimmune and
allergic epidemic. These conditions are indeed exploding around the world.
Asthma, allergic rhinitis, and eczema are examples of allergic diseases, where
the immune system aggressively attacks a benign outside stimulus. From 1960 to
2000 the incidence of asthma increased at least tenfold in the Western world. A
similar, disturbing rise in autoimmune diseases has occurred in parallel. Type 1
diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and Crohn’s disease are autoimmune diseases,
where the immune system decides our own body is the enemy and goes on the
attack. Since the 1950s, the rates of type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and
Crohn’s disease have each risen 300 percent or more.
   Allergic and autoimmune conditions are much more common in industrialized
nations than in agricultural ones. For example, the number of new cases of type
1 diabetes in Finland per year is 62.3 per every 100,000 children, compared with
just 6.2 in Mexico and 0.5 in Pakistan. You could argue that that’s due to genetic
differences, but they also appear to increase in prevalence within countries as
they become more industrialized. Croatia, for example, has seen an increase in
Crohn’s disease from 0.7 per 100,000 (in 1989) to 6.5 (in 2004), coinciding with
modernization, and Brazil saw Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis increase by
11 and 15 percent every year from 1988 to 2012, respectively. Doctors from
these countries have to come to the United States to learn about these conditions
because the problems didn’t exist in their countries until recently, so they don’t
know how to care for their patients.
   Evidence suggests that our gut microbiome not only changes with allergic and
autoimmune disease, but it may predict or even cause these immune system
conditions. For example, researchers analyzed the dirty diapers of three hundred
toddlers at three months of age. They discovered that specific changes in the gut
bacteria this early in life already predicted which children would subsequently
develop asthma years later. But to prove that the gut microbes were actually
causing the asthma, they transferred the stool from the diapers into special germ-
free mice. Yes, they did a fecal transplant from a human into a mouse. And to be
clear, the human stool wasn’t from a person with asthma. Instead, it was from a
three-month-old’s poopy diaper who was felt to be at risk for developing asthma.
So what happened? Well, the mice all developed inflamed lungs, indicative of
asthma.
   We evolved to have an immu ne system to protect us from infection, the
leading cause of death up until just a century ago. Our gut microbes have been a
part of that evolution from the very beginning, and as a result they play a critical
role in immune function. Yes, this can mean that damage to the microbiota puts
us at risk for immune dysregulation, manifesting with autoimmune and allergic
illness. But on the flip side, a strong microbiome empowers the 70 percent of
neighboring immune cells for optimal function to protect us from infection and
malignancy. When we take care of our microbes, they take care of us.

     IMMUNE-MEDIATED CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
     DYSBIOSIS
     Type 1 diabetes mellitus                 Rheumatoid arthritis
     Celiac disease                           Ulcerative colitis
     Multiple sclerosis                       Crohn’s disease
     Asthma                                   Microscopic colitis
     Food allergies                           Ankylosing spondylitis
     Eczema                                   Lupus
     Seasonal allergies                       Interstitial cystitis
     Eosinophilic esophagitis                 Autoimmune hepatitis
     Dermatitis herpetiformis                 Primary biliary cholangitis
     Psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis            Primary sclerosing cholangitis
     Scleroderma                              Sarcoidosis
     Chronic fatigue syndrome                 Fibromyalgia
     Antiphospholipid syndrome                Guillain-Barré syndrome
     Restless leg syndrome                    Behçet’s disease
     Sjögren’s syndrome                       Kawasaki disease
                                              ANCA-associated vasculitis




The Microbiome Code for personalized food processing
The diet industry has for a very long time told us that weight gain is within our
control if we could only have the self-control to do enough
CrossFit/Zumba/yoga in combination with the right diet, whether that’s Paleo,
SlimFast, Weight Watchers, Keto, or juice cleanses. But what if it all comes
down to the bacteria in our guts? That’s what researchers recently set out to
discover when a report emerged of a young woman, just thirty-two years old,
who underwent a fecal transplant for a chronic C. diff infection. What ensued got
both scientists and the press into a tizzy. In the sixteen months after her fecal
transplant she had dramatic, unintentional weight gain—going from 136 pounds
up to 170 pounds. Her body mass index increased from very nearly a normal,
healthy weight (BMI of 26) up to overt obesity (BMI of 33). Nothing else in her
life had changed: not her diet, not her stress level, not her level of physical
activity. Just the fecal transplant.
   Normally weight gain of this kind wouldn’t be such a big deal except that for
the first time in humans we had illustrated an idea that has been shown
repeatedly, time after time, in animals: that our gut microbiota has extreme
control over the way that we process our food and our metabolism. So much
control, in fact, that the same food can yield totally different effects depending
on the gut microbiota involved.
   One study took identical human twins who were genetically the same but one
was obese and the other thin. Researchers took stool from the twins and
transferred it into germ-free mice, and the mouse that got the lean twin’s stool
stayed lean and the one who got the obese twin’s became obese. Despite the fact
that both mice were fed the exact same diet and exact same calories, they found
that the body type transferred.
   So many of us have spent years working really hard to lose weight—
exercising, eating well, doing all the things experts (and the not-so-expert) are
telling us to do—and now we understand why that might not be working. We
need a little help from our friends. You can give the exact same food to two
different people and the differences in their microbiota will determine what they
ultimately get out of that food. Mind blowing, isn’t it?
   But it doesn’t stop there. Our microbiota doesn’t just regulate our metabolism
in a calories-in, calories-out sense. It is also deeply intertwined with our
endocrine system, affecting our response to insulin. After a meal your blood
sugar level rises and the cells in your pancreas respond by releasing insulin into
your bloodstream to lower your blood sugar. If you have diabetes, you have an
inadequate supply of insulin to control your blood sugar, so it stays elevated.
Type 1 diabetics have an autoimmune disease that destroys the part of their
pancreas that produces insulin. As we discussed before, autoimmune type 1
diabetes connects back to gut health. On the flip side, type 2 diabetics have a
fully functioning pancreas running on overdrive but they are unable to produce
enough insulin to keep up with the body’s demands. This is a result of insulin
resistance, meaning more insulin has to be produced to achieve the same effect.
Insulin is a growth factor. What do you think happens when you promote
increased growth in the body? Type 2 diabetes has been linked to esophageal,
colorectal, pancreatic, hepatocellular, renal, breast, endometrial, and urinary
cancer.


     Cancer stinks. Literally.
          Did you know that dogs can actually smell colorectal cancer? They were 98 percent accurate
          in detecting colon cancer from a series of stool specimens. And you thought they were just
          sniffing backsides for fun? Give man’s best friend some credit! Colorectal cancer is the
          number two cause of cancer death in America, and emerging studies are showing that specific
          bacteria in the colon play a role in its development, which may explain how they’re able to do
          this. Alterations in gut bacteria have been associated with a number of emerging cancers:
          breast, gastric, esophageal, pancreatic, laryngeal, liver, and gallbladder carcinomas. Ongoing
          research is being performed to determine the degree for which the bacteria are actually
          causative.



   We’ve already shown that your gut bacteria differentially regulate your
response to food and can affect weight gain. How about your body’s response to
insulin? In an absolutely fascinating study, adult men with metabolic syndrome
and insulin resistance received a fecal transplant from a lean donor. This led to a
change in their gut microbiota associated with improvements in insulin
sensitivity and a lowering of their blood sugar. Unfortunately, the effect only
lasted a few weeks because they didn’t change their diet, so the new microbiome
couldn’t be sustained.

     METABOLIC CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DYSBIOSIS
     Obesity                                   Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
     Type 2 diabetes                           Alcoholic steatohepatitis
     Coronary artery disease                   Acute alcoholic hepatitis
     Hyperlipidemia                            Alcoholic cirrhosis
     Chronic kidney disease                    Acute pancreatitis
     Gout                                      Chronic pancreatitis

   But you don’t need to have diabetes to show an influence from your gut
microbiota! In another study, researchers discovered that foods had a very
different blood sugar response in each person. The gut microbiome was
responsible for this unique response. Using solely an individual’s gut microbial
profile, they were able to predict which foods would cause less of a blood sugar
spike. It was different for every person. In other words, you have a unique,
completely personal response to the food you eat that is a reflection of the
makeup of your gut microbiota. Good ole bio-individuality, my friends!
  Discard all (or most) of what you’ve ever learned about metabolism, diabetes,
and weight loss. It’s a loss of diversity in the gut microbiota, increase in
pathogenic bacteria, and low-grade inflammation from bacterial endotoxin that is
associated with diabetes, weight gain, and obesity. There is also evidence to
suggest that our gut microbes control the release of hormones that regulate
appetite and energy balance, such as leptin, ghrelin, GLP-1 (glucagon-like
peptide-1), and peptide YY. Increased microbial diversity in your gut equals
improved metabolic health and insulin sensitivity.
  So when we properly nourish our gut microbiota, we are rewarded with
microbes that extract everything that we need from our food and nothing that we
don’t, signal us when to stop eating so we don’t overdo it, and promote a natural
metabolic balance that doesn’t require us to count calories in order to maintain a
healthy weight. A healthy microbiome makes it happen effortlessly.



It’s not your fault you’re hormonal!
The influence of the gut microbiota on the endocrine, or hormonal, system
extends far beyond diabetes. The gut is literally the largest endocrine organ in
the body, deeply involved in securing hormonal balance. Take estrogen, for
example. Gut microbes secrete the enzyme β-glucuronidase, which activates
estrogen so it can do what it’s supposed to do throughout the body. Imagine the
flow of estrogen as a dammed river, and the microbes have their hand on a lever
that controls the floodgates. When working just right, estrogen levels are
delicately flowing in that sweet spot—not too much, not too little—to give the
good stuff: stronger bones, lower cholesterol, clear skin, fertile ovaries, and a
voracious sexual appetite. A healthy gut microbiota does that for you.
   But what happens if you’re loose on the floodgate? The body gets flooded
with excess estrogen, which has been associated with endometriosis, endometrial
hyperplasia, and breast and endometrial cancer. No surprise, we find damage to
the gut microbiome in association with each of these conditions.
   Alternatively, if the microbiota are too restrictive on the floodgates, you get an
estrogen drought. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), which is characterized by
menstrual irregularity, abnormal hair growth, weight gain, acne, and insulin
resistance, is a condition that is characterized by estrogen dysregulation. But
PCOS is a true loss of hormonal balance where there is an increase in androgens
(or testosterone) in addition to altered estrogen. As it turns out, androgen
production is also mediated in part by the gut microbiome. Clostridium scindens
is a gut bacteria known to convert glucocorticoids (think cortisol) into androgens
in the gut. So if you have too much C. scindens you’ll have androgen excess. A
healthy gut microbiome keeps our estrogens and androgens in balance, while
dysbiosis has been found in association with PCOS.
   It’s quite clear that there’s a gut-hormone axis, but let’s take it a step further.
It appears that there may be a gut-testicle axis, too. Fellas, listen up! Remember
the model for dysbiosis? Damage to the gut microbiota causes increased
intestinal permeability (leaky gut) and allows release of bacterial endotoxin into
our system. Well, bacterial endotoxin leaves the gut and travels through the
blood to the testicles, where it wreaks havoc. Science says it causes loss of
testosterone and sperm production. It’s kind of like gut health–induced
“shrinkage.” (Sorry for that mental image.) Not to mention the impact on mental
health, which often includes loss of self-esteem and confidence.
   But the link between gut health and hormones doesn’t stop there. Have you
ever been on a date and found yourself either super attracted to or turned off by
your date based upon their smell? It’s been demonstrated in animal studies that
bacteria control the release of guaiacol and other phenolic compounds that
produce our odor profile. These are actually pheromones that play a role in
sexual attraction and mating behavior. In other words, our microbes are actually
our matchmakers in waiting. What’s interesting is that different microbes release
different smells. The healthy microbes produce a fragrance worthy of Aphrodite,
while the pathogenic bacteria drop a stench bomb that keeps people at their
distance. Not every microbe makes a great wingman!
   And while we’re on the topic, have you ever wondered why we kiss? It’s
actually an expression of love to share your microbiome with another person.
Every time we kiss we exchange eighty million microbes with our partner, and
vice versa. There is speculation that kissing may have evolved as a way of
sampling a potential lover’s microbiome for compatibility. Yes, we are human.
But everything that we do as humans involves our microbiota one way or
another, even the way we love one another.

     ENDOCRINE AND HORMONAL CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
     DYSBIOSIS
     Endometriosis                                       Hypothyroid
     Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)                    Breast cancer
     Endometrial hyperplasia                             Endometrial cancer
     Female infertility                                Prostate cancer
     Sexual dysfunction                                Erectile dysfunction




The second brain’s power over the first brain
Upstairs is your brain. Downstairs is your gut. Most would think of these organs
as two very separate entities, with the brain operating as central command and
the gut as what, well, makes you poop. In the hierarchy of things, clearly the
brain would come out on top. But recently that line of division has become a bit
blurred because we’ve discovered that the gut is a separate nervous system
known as the “second brain” or the “enteric nervous system.”
   This might be the first time you’re making this connection, but brain health
actually starts in the gut—and that’s because they are in constant communication
with each other. Literally right this second, there are over five hundred million
nerves in your intestines sending feedback to your brain through the vagus
nerve. That’s five times more nerves than you’ll find in your spinal cord. That is
a lot of information!
   That’s only the beginning. Gut microbes are able to communicate with our
brain using the immune system and through the release of neurotransmitters,
hormones, and signaling molecules. Neurotransmitters like serotonin and
dopamine play a powerful role in our mood, energy levels, motivation, and sense
of reward. Gut microbes both produce and respond to neurohormones like
serotonin, dopamine, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), and norepinephrine. In fact,
90 percent of serotonin and 50 percent of dopamine are actually produced in the
gut. Precursors of serotonin and dopamine are able to cross the blood–brain
barrier and alter our mood or behavior. Taken in sum, intestinal serotonin is able
to influence gut motility, mood, appetite, sleep, and brain function.
   That’s just serotonin. Your gut produces more than thirty neurotransmitters. In
Chapter 3 we will discuss one of the major ways that your gut can improve brain
health—through short-chain fatty acids. A healthy gut microbiome is able to
extend its influence across the blood–brain barrier to keep our mind sharp, our
energy level high, and our mood relaxed. But on the flip side, damage to the gut
microbiome has been associated with Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, migraine
headaches, chronic fatigue, autism, and ADHD.
   With the gut acting as home base for these neurotransmitters, you can see how
mental health conditions like depression and anxiety emerge when there’s a
problem in the gut. I see it every day in my clinic. For instance, there is
tremendous overlap between irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and depressed
mood and anxiety. And for the longest time, we mislabeled these patients. We
did not understand that at the root of their anxiety or vicious mood swings could
be a gastrointestinal issue. It’s now clear that when you have alteration or
damage to the gut bacteria, you alter serotonin balance, and thereby alter both
mood and gut motility. The end result is an IBS patient with anxiety. One of my
mentors, Dr. Douglas Drossman, has for decades been at the center of the
research to clarify this important connection.
   We’ve also learned that IBS patients have altered function of the five hundred
million gut nerves. It’s what we call “visceral hypersensitivity,” meaning that
they will have intestinal distress, nausea, or abdominal pain in response to
triggers that most people don’t even notice. For example, IBS patients often
think they produce more gas, but they actually don’t. Instead, they produce the
same amount of gas but they just react to it differently—due to increased
visceral hypersensitivity.
   Even our behavior is influenced by our gut. There is evidence to suggest that
gut microbes control our cravings. Have you ever gone away on vacation for a
few days and can’t wait to get home and have one of your old stalwart meals?
That’s your microbiome speaking to you. In fact, gut microbes may put their
well-being over ours by manipulating our eating behavior—some of them want
us to eat sugar and fat, which are bad for us but good for them! They can
promote their fitness at the expense of ours. You know how some people love
chocolate (slowly raises hand) and others can take it or leave it? Well, we’ve
found that “chocolate-desiring” people actually have different microbial
metabolites in their urine than do “chocolate-indifferent” individuals, despite
eating identical diets. Those microbial metabolites may be the signal that drives
you to crave chocolate, which begs the question: Are we merely zombies, doing
the will of our bacterial overlords? Are we pseudo-possessed by the bacterial
demons in our gut? MUAAAHAAAHAAA!
   Okay, now that I’ve got you all bug-eyed and freaked out, let’s keep in mind
that you are a creature of free will. Remember, you get to choose what you put in
your mouth and swallow, and those choices are what will ultimately determine
health in our microbiome and throughout our body. More important, your
cravings and taste buds can change and you can train your gut to fall in love with
things that are actually good for you. Following the plan in this book will allow
you to break free once and for all—it’s as though we’re performing an exorcism
from your gremlin-gut microbes and replacing them with guardian-gut angels.

     NEUROPSYCHIATRIC CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
     DYSBIOSIS
     Alzheimer’s disease                         Anxiety
     Parkinson’s disease                         Depression
     Schizophrenia                               Autism spectrum disorders
     ADHD                                        Bipolar disorder
     Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis               Migraine headaches
     Chronic fatigue syndrome                    Fibromyalgia
     Restless legs syndrome                      Hepatic encephalopathy




How the genetic game was turned on its head by microbes
Since 1953 when Professors James Watson and Francis Crick described the
structure of DNA, it seemed that genetics held the keys to understanding human
health and disease. Nearly fifty years later and after a massive coordinated
international effort among one thousand scientists across twenty institutions, the
Human Genome Project culminated in 2000 when the human genetic code was
unlocked for the first time. This was as big as it gets from a scientific
perspective.
   Sadly, for all the hype, the returns on this breakthrough have been incredibly
disappointing. You’ve no doubt noticed that we have not resolved all medical
problems since the year 2000. Why did genetics alone not heal us? Well, we
have since discovered by studying identical twins that less than 20 percent of
disease is based on genetics. Yes, there are some, such as cystic fibrosis and
Down syndrome, where if you have the genes then you get the disease. But
taking all chronic disease across the board, more than 80 percent of your disease
risk is determined by your environment and exposures during your lifetime.
There’s a silver lining here. You are not the victim of the genes you were born
with. You may have certain predispositions—we all do. But you ultimately
control your health destiny, in large part through the effects of your diet and
lifestyle on your microbiome.
   In a letter to Science magazine in 2001, Professor Julian Davies warned that
decoding the human genome was not enough to understand human biology
because there are more than a thousand bacterial species living in and on the
human body and they are critically affecting human life. We previously noted
that there are more bacteria than cells in the body, but let’s take it a step further
and talk genetics. More than 99 percent of your DNA comes from microbes.
Yes, your genes are less than 1 percent human! Further, our human genomes are
virtually identical—up to 99.9 percent the same. But our microbiomes may be as
much as 90 percent different from one person to the next.
   Beyond holding the cards on a genetic monopoly, our gut microbes also exert
tremendous power over the expression of your genes through something called
epigenetics. Imagine your gut microbiota as controlling a light switch and the
wiring behind the wall is your genetic code. The gut microbiota is not changing
the wiring behind the wall, but it can turn the lights on or off. You can’t change
your genetic code, but you can effect which genes get turned on or off. That is
insanely powerful, if you think about it.
   An example of this concept of epigenetics is celiac disease. Celiac disease is a
condition in which the immune system decides that gluten is the enemy. Gluten
is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. Every time someone with celiac
disease consumes gluten, the immune system lashes out and attacks their
intestine, causing inflammation that shows up as diarrhea, weight loss, and
abdominal pain. This is incredibly dangerous because people with celiac disease
who continue to consume gluten can develop small intestine lymphoma, which is
nearly universally fatal.
   Celiac is a genetically motivated disease. This means that you must carry the
gene for celiac to get it. If you don’t have the gene, you can’t have the disease.
About 35 percent of Americans carry the gene for celiac but only 1 percent
manifest the disease. In the last fifty years we’ve seen a 500 percent increase in
celiac disease. So what explains the rapid increase? Clearly not a shift in
genetics during that brief period. So what is it that determines who ultimately
expresses the gene? Dr. Elena Verdú from McMaster University in Canada
showed us through a series of eloquent studies that there are three criteria that
must be met to develop celiac disease: 1) presence of the gene, 2) exposure to
gluten, and—you guessed it, 3) alteration or damage to the gut microbiota.
   We thought that cracking the human genome would produce major
breakthroughs in medicine because we thought that human health was primarily
determined by genetic makeup. Nope. We are a superorganism with a genetic
makeup dominated by the invisible microbes within us. And this is actually a
good thing! Rather than worrying about the 0.5 percent of your DNA that you
simply cannot control, let’s optimize our microbiome through diet and lifestyle
and enjoy the positive effects it has on 99.5 percent of our DNA plus our
epigenetic expression.



It’s time to transform your health from the inside out!
What once was dismissed as poop is now the star quarterback for human health.
Yes, it can be intimidating that most modern diseases have been connected to
damage to the gut microbiome. But remember, we are not helpless victims
stricken with disease. We have the power of science on our side, and for the first
time in human history we actually know enough about the gut microbiota to
understand it and start to use it to our advantage. In this book I will use diet and
lifestyle to rebalance your gut microbes. You’ll see your digestion, immune
system, metabolism, hormones, cognition, and gene expression become
optimally aligned, and you’ll transform into the microbe-empowered
superhuman that you are.




To view the 55+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                               2
Twenty-First-Century Life: Overfed,
Undernourished, and Hyper-medicated
         Our modern lifestyle is destroying our gut AND our health




When I first met Kristen she sat with her shoulders slumped and her brow
creased with worry. She came in to see me, hoping I’d address the chronic
abdominal pain and diarrhea she’d been struggling with for years, but when I
asked her to tell me more about what was going on, she launched into a litany of
other concerns: “I feel sick all the time, Dr. B. I’m overweight, anxious, and
depressed. I’ve got migraines and seasonal allergies so bad that I sometimes take
antibiotics three or four times a year for sinus infections. I was also recently
diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome.” She took a deep breath. “And that
really scares me.” She told me about the slew of medications her various doctors
had her on, and that she thought she may have sensitivity to gluten and beans
and has eliminated them as part of doing the Paleo diet. Unfortunately, she
wasn’t feeling better so she was thinking about trying the Keto diet because she
had several friends doing it and they were losing weight.
   Kristen needs a plan that actually works. She knows she wants to fix her gut,
but the approach of “eliminate symptoms by eliminating the foods that cause
symptoms” hasn’t worked for her. After multiple experts villainizing their
poisons du jour—gluten, grains, phytates, lectins, carbs—Kristen misses the
feeling of simply enjoying a meal. She wants to eat food that she loves, eat it in
abundance and without restrictions, and not be constantly running away from
food monsters. The good news for Kristen and everyone reading this is that I
know exactly what you need to heal your gut.
   Patients like Kristen are incredibly common in my gastroenterology clinic.
Every day I meet people with stories like hers: people with complex medical
problems, even at a very young age, coming to my clinic with digestive issues
like irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), acid reflux, chronic diarrhea, abdominal
pain, gas and bloating, or constipation. Often several at once. And what’s
shocking is how many also have immune-mediated disorders like type 1
diabetes, celiac, multiple sclerosis, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, or
rheumatoid arthritis, and are often coping with depression and anxiety, hormone
imbalances, and weight gain, too.
   It’s not just in my clinic—nationwide, the statistics back this up. As a country
we are fatter, sicker, and more heavily medicated than at any other time in
human history. More than 72 percent of Americans are overweight—that’s
essentially three in four people—and 40 percent of us are carrying thirty or more
pounds of extra baggage around our waist and hips. For the first time in over a
hundred years, the U.S. life expectancy just dropped for the third year in a row.
The last time this happened was from 1915 to 1918—when U.S. involvement in
World War I and literally the worst influenza pandemic in modern history
combined to kill nearly one million Americans. Last I checked we weren’t
conscripting an army for global battle or ravaged by a plague, so what’s our
excuse?
   Despite advances in medicine and our spending more money on health care
than any country in the world by far, our life expectancy is actually contracting.
And now 60 percent of Americans age twenty or older are using prescription
drugs. In fact, the percentage of us using five or more medications has doubled
in the last twelve years. Yes, modern medicine has given us some wonderful
treatment options—believe me, if I get sick, I want one of my esteemed
colleagues caring for me—but we can’t ignore the downsides of our love for
quick-fix pills and overreliance on medications. Consider that in 2014 alone,
nearly 1.3 million Americans sought emergency room treatment for adverse drug
effects, and about 124,000 people died from them.
   For me, and I’m guessing for you, too, since you picked up this book, these
aren’t just numbers on a page. Behind the numbers are real people—people like
Kristen, who need more than another diagnosis, an additional script to fill, or yet
another fad diet to follow based on bad science. If you’re struggling with
digestive issues, autoimmune illnesses, mental health, heart health, hormonal
imbalance, weight gain, diabetes, or any related concerns, including side effects
from taking several medications, I hear you and I see you. Many, many people
sit across from me day after day in my clinic, often with tears in their eyes, who
are struggling, too, and who need real help now. I have a fire in my heart to find
the solution for these ailments that goes beyond a patch on the hole. We need to
get at the root cause to reverse these diseases and prevent new ones.
   The trend in our life expectancy isn’t bad luck or a mere coincidence. Did you
know that at least seven of the top ten causes of death—the things that are
lowering our life expectancy—are caused by lifestyle? In order, they are: heart
disease, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), stroke,
Alzheimer’s, diabetes, and kidney disease. The problem is caused by lifestyle
and yet we completely (and inexplicably) ignore lifestyle as a therapeutic option,
choosing medications as our primary treatment option. By ignoring the cause we
will never get to the root of the problem.
   Sadly, the pharmaceutical industry has hijacked our health care system. Big
Pharma runs the studies, they control the research, and here we are with three in
five U.S. adults taking prescription drugs, 269 million prescriptions for
antibiotics per year, 115 million proton pump inhibitor prescriptions, and 30
billion doses of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen
and naproxen. Meanwhile, obesity, and all the health issues that stem from it,
seems to be becoming the new normal. On so many levels—our health, our food,
even how often we poop—we are normalizing abnormal.
   A medication treats symptoms. It artificially props up something that’s
broken. It doesn’t prevent and it certainly doesn’t treat root causes. It’s time for
us to stop waiting for the bomb to drop when our health deteriorates and we
desperately need “sick care,” and instead embrace true “health care” by
preventing our problems with lifestyle medicine.
   So when patients like Kristen come to me with a long list of symptoms,
asking, “Doctor, why is this happening to me?” I don’t just see the digestive
issues they’ve come to me for; I see a web of interconnected symptoms. I see
digestive concerns intertwined among multiple systems within the body:
gynecologic, endocrine, neurologic, the immune system, even mood. And I
know that the answer isn’t cutting out gluten or beans or simply adding an
additional medication for IBS—those are just covering up symptoms. The
answer is at the root of it all—the place where it’s all connected is in the gut.



Modernization and the origins of modern epidemics
In the late nineteenth century the average life expectancy was just forty-seven
years and the top causes of death were infections. Infectious diseases such as
smallpox, cholera, diphtheria, pneumonia, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, typhus,
and syphilis were rampant. Heart disease and cancer were there, but a small
problem compared to infections. Thanks to Louis Pasteur’s discovery of what we
now call modern germ theory, we finally understood that behind the top causes
of death is a germ. In response, bacteria became public enemy numbers one,
two, and three. So what are you going to do about it? Well, we did what humans
have always done at every stage of human history—we innovated to find a
solution to the problem in front of us. As we entered the twentieth century we
started adding chlorine to our drinking water, developed vaccines, improved
sanitation, and began metal canning and early preservatives. Good news, it was
working: polio was on the brink of extinction, and many other infectious
diseases, including smallpox, were on the decline. Then penicillin was
discovered by Sir Alexander Fleming in 1928 and it became commercially
available in 1945. Our life expectancy rapidly jumped over the coming years,
and in 1969, U.S. Surgeon General William Stewart confidently declared to
Congress that it was time to “close the books on infectious diseases.”
   Anything that good is going to get overutilized. We doubled down on this
approach. In 1928 women were encouraged to “disinfect” with Lysol douche—
yes, the same Lysol that today is used to scour toilets and floors. After World
War II, we developed synthetic herbicides, fungicides, and insecticides. We
added fluoride to the water. We discovered that antibiotics and synthetic
hormones accelerated livestock growth, so we started pumping our livestock
with both. We created antibacterial soaps and astringents and industrial cleaning
products. If bacteria were the enemy, we were basically nuking the crap out of
them. There’s no question: We were winning this war.
   And then heart disease and cancer emerged en masse.
   Meanwhile, technology was developing on all fronts, for better or for worse.
The number of food additives skyrocketed to more than ten thousand, the vast
majority of which had never had human testing because they got approved under
a loophole called GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe, pronounced GEE
rass). Remember this acronym—GRAS—because I’m coming back to it in a
minute. Additionally, the pharmaceutical industry exploded and now more than
fifteen hundred drugs were approved by the FDA, which explains why there was
no nutrition training in medical school—we were spending all of our time
learning about these drugs, their uses, and their side effects. Plastics, which
contain bisphenol A (BPA), known to have estrogen-like effects, were invented
and began to be used abundantly—in everything from food storage to floss and
from clothing to baby toys. We developed planes, trains, automobiles, and
motorized scooters to reduce our mobility. Advances in television, computers,
smartphones, and video games made it easy to forgo exercise and hijack our
brains and our daily sleep-wake cycles. Why read a book when watching the
movie only takes ninety minutes? Why build a fort and imagine a game when a
video game will do all the creative heavy lifting for you? Why go to sleep when
the sun goes down when you can read Twitter all night long?
   In 1994, genetically modified organisms (GMOs) first arrived in our stores.
Today more than 80 percent of all genetically modified crops grown worldwide
have been engineered to be herbicide tolerant. What this means is that the
genetically modified plant survives being sprayed with herbicides while the
surrounding plants (and potentially other life) all die. For example, Monsanto,
the leading developer of GMOs, created a range of crops with a genetic trait that
makes them impervious to the herbicide glyphosate, specifically soy beans and
corn. We need massive amounts of soy beans and corn to support animal
agriculture in the United States. This is a boon for genetically engineered
farming as yields of corn, cotton, and soybeans are said to have risen by 20 to 30
percent through the use of genetic engineering. Meanwhile, the use of toxic
herbicides, such as glyphosate in Roundup, has increased fifteenfold since
GMOs were first introduced. That’s good for business if the bottom line is
enhancing your bottom line. In March 2015, the World Health Organization
determined that the herbicide glyphosate is “probably carcinogenic to humans.”
A more recent study found a 41 percent increase in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in
those with high exposure to glyphosate. Adding credence to this association, in a
prospective cohort study of more than sixty-eight thousand French volunteers,
those who primarily ate organic foods were less likely to develop non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma and postmenopausal breast cancer compared to those who rarely or
never ate organic foods.


     Why I buy organic whenever possible
          By definition, if a food is certified organic it is not genetically modified and was not sprayed
          by glyphosate. I don’t think this is the only reason to buy organic produce, however. I view it
          as an investment in my health, our family’s health, and the health of our planet. The chemicals
          being used in modern agriculture aren’t affecting only us; they’re affecting the health of our
          soil. If you don’t have healthy soil, you can’t have nutritious food. Human health starts in the
          dirt. We need to protect this precious commodity. When you spend your money, you are
          placing your vote in a way. You are empowering an industry. I, for one, choose to empower
          our organic farmers and regenerative agriculture. They are healers just as our doctors are. Only
          with them can we enrich our soil, increase biodiversity, and heal ecosystems large (our planet)
          and small (your gut). Let’s rally behind them and give them the support they deserve.



  Let’s take a step back for a moment and consider our modern life in the
broader context of human evolution. Since the very first human, the microbes
have been a part of our story. Every single human life has been a buddy tale
about our relationship with our microbes. We rose and fell together. We
coevolved. For most of the three million years we lived in a famished, violent
world, exposed to the elements. Life was about survival, and most of us
succumbed at a young age to infection, starvation, or bodily injury. We needed
to live long enough to procreate and continue our species. If not, we’d go
extinct. So our microbes helped us to develop an immune system to fight
infection, clotting factors to stop bleeding, and efficient ways to harvest and
store energy from our food. For example, the insulin resistance seen in type 2
diabetes is actually a protective mechanism to maintain fuel for the brain in
times of starvation. As part of species preservation we evolved a taste for salt,
sugar, and fat because in famine those promote survival. We became wired to
crave those things.
   Now consider the American college kid, lying on the couch all day playing
video games, drinking soda, and having pizza delivered. The human experience
is radically different in just the last hundred years. We’ve moved indoors,
become sedentary, obsess over electronics, spray everything (including
ourselves) with chemicals, and have a limitless food supply that exploits our
taste for salt, sugar, and fat. And now the inflammation, clotting, and energy
preservation that we needed to keep our species alive is the very thing causing
cancer, cardiovascular disease, obesity, and diabetes. What once helped preserve
our species has become our fatal flaw.*
   And right now, as we speak, our microbes are evolving to adapt to the new
environment. Given their central role in human health, we can either passively
let them spin out of control with our destructive lifestyle, or we can embrace
them as our “secret sauce” for longevity and healthy aging. My goal with this
book is to help you shake off the detriments of a twenty-first-century life by
engineering your microbiome for health and longevity. In order to do this, we
need to pay attention to anything that disrupts the gut microbiota. Let’s take a
deeper dive into how the things we put into our mouth and swallow—
medications and food—affect your gut health.


Modern health care, drugs, and your microbiota
It comes as no surprise that antibiotics absolutely decimate the gut microbiota.
Just five days of ciprofloxacin wipes out about a third of gut bacteria and your
gut microbiota are never quite the same. Most species recover within four weeks,
but some are still absent after six months. In the case of clarithromycin and
metronidazole, the effects are still evident four years after treatment. And just
four days of three broad-spectrum antibiotics can permanently destroy nine
beneficial species of bacteria. The result of all these antibiotics is a “new
normal” microbiome with more antibiotic-resistant microbes that leaves us
vulnerable to infection, allergic conditions, osteoporosis, and obesity. I’m sure
you recall all the problems we had with antibiotics and C. diff infection up until
we started using fecal transplant. Pretty disturbing stuff when you consider that
there are 269 million antibiotic prescriptions in the United States each year and a
recent study suggested that 23 percent of antibiotic prescriptions are flat-out
inappropriate while another 36 percent were questionable.
   Antibiotics aren’t the only medicines causing trouble. In one study, 24 percent
of tested drugs altered gut bacteria. For example, proton pump inhibitors
increase the risk of small intestine bacterial overgrowth and C. diff. Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen and naproxen alter the gut
microbiota, destroy the intestinal lining to create ulcers, and predispose to
inflammatory bowel disease and microscopic colitis. Oral contraceptives have
been associated with the development of both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative
colitis. Frankly, these are just the tip of the iceberg. There are so many other
medicines that I have concerns about, but the studies haven’t been done yet.


The SAD diet is literally killing your gut
While medications are huge, let’s not ignore the most important change over the
last hundred years—our diet.
   According to U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates, 32 percent of our
calories come from animal foods, 57 percent from processed plant foods, and
only 11 percent from whole grains, beans, fruits, vegetables, and nuts. The
average American eats twenty-three pounds of pizza, twenty-four pounds of
artificial sweeteners, twenty-nine pounds of french fries, and thirty-one pounds
of cheese per year. The United States also has the highest meat consumption in
the world—about 220 pounds of meat per person per year. We eat meat thirty-
two times for every single time a person in India sits down to have it in their
meal. Yet there are fad diets out there trying to convince you to double down on
this trend. That it’s not enough; we need more.
   The Standard American Diet (SAD) stands in stark contrast to the people who
live in the Blue Zones as described by Dan Buettner. These are the regions of the
world where people are living much longer compared to the rest of us. There are
five Blue Zones: Okinawa, Japan; Sardinia, Italy; Nicoya, Costa Rica; Icaria,
Greece; and . . . *drumroll* . . . Loma Linda, California.
   Wait, what? Cali? Yes, right here in our own country lives a group of people
who use the same health care and the same food systems and they live ten years
longer than most Americans on average. They are also ten times more likely to
live to a hundred! Who are these mystery people? They are the Seventh-day
Adventists, whose theology teaches them that they will come back to re-inhabit
their bodies and therefore they emphasize health and self-care. They have proven
that it’s entirely possible to be a healthy American.
   So here are these five geographic regions scattered around the world,
completely culturally distinct, yet there are common themes in the food that they
eat. All five are at least 90 percent plant-based. There’s an emphasis on seasonal
fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, and nuts. Cow’s milk is not a part
of their diet, and meat is consumed sparingly, using it as a celebratory food, a
small side, or a way to flavor dishes. In contrast, the Standard American Diet
relies heavily on processed food, meat, and dairy pounded on our poor gut
microbes three times a day with snacks and desserts to boot. What’s it doing to
us? Let’s break down the science behind the elements:
Sugars and highly refined carbohydrates
The average American crushes 152 pounds of sugar and 120 pounds of grains
per year, most of which are highly refined to strip away the fiber, causing them
to be rapidly absorbed in the small intestine rather than slowly digested. Think
white bread/rice/pasta and sugary cereals. These are not healthy carbohydrates!
The result is a dramatic loss of gut microbial diversity and the rise of
inflammatory bacteria that love simple carbohydrates. And then we wonder
where our sugar cravings come from.
Salt
Processed foods are loaded to the gills with salt. The average American
consumes nearly three pounds of salt per year. Three pounds! We only need a
few ounces. Anything more has consequences, including in the gut microbiome,
where it drives autoimmunity by inducing helper T cells, which can contribute to
hypertension.
Chemical preservatives, additives, and colorants
Does it come as a surprise that the ten thousand food additives in our food
supply may be destroying our microbiota? Numerous food additives have
already been shown to damage the gut microbiota, while more than 99 percent of
them haven’t been studied. For example, two commonly used emulsifiers—
carboxymethylcellulose and polysorbate 80—reduce microbial diversity, induce
inflammation, and promote obesity and colitis in mice. Titanium dioxide (TiO)
nanoparticles, found in more than nine hundred food products, worsen intestinal
inflammation.
   Additives such as these were snuck into our diet through the “Generally
Recognized As Safe” loophole. They were GRASed into our diet. Yes, GRAS
needs to be used as a verb because that’s the only way to adequately describe the
careless acceptance of chemicals into our food supply by our regulatory
agencies.
   Some would argue that if these chemicals are consumed in limited doses they
are safe based on animal model studies. I strongly disagree. To GRAS is to
assume safety until proven otherwise. That’s a huge assumption given that
animal models often don’t translate to humans. We have no human studies for
most of these ten thousand additives, and we definitely don’t have long-term
studies. Anyone who would claim confidence that these additives truly are safe
for long-term human consumption would be doing so without human research to
say so. There are ten thousand chances for us to be wrong in our assumption of
safety, and it only takes us being wrong once to cause harm. Rather than
GRASing things into our food supply and hoping for the best, I believe it best to
be skeptical until actually proven otherwise.
Artificial sweeteners
“These artificial sweeteners are awesome! All the flavor, no calories!” —Dr. B,
2013
“Keep that crap away from me!”—Dr. B, today


   How about artificial sweeteners, ubiquitous in diet soda beverages and loads
of other places? When they came to market we thought, “Zero calories, that has
to be better than sugar, right?” It’s intuitive! Turns out they’re actually worse
because they induce changes in the microbiome that promote inflammation,
insulin resistance, and liver injury. You will actually be less tolerant of sugar by
using artificial sweeteners.
   And then there’s the downright scary stuff . . . Remember from Chapter 1 the
explosion of Clostridioides difficile that’s occurred in the last twenty years? C.
diff infection was fairly rare and only seen in hospitalized patients on antibiotics
in the early 2000s. Just ten years later we’re seeing five hundred thousand
infections per year and thirty thousand deaths including in college kids who have
never stepped foot in a hospital or had recent antibiotic use. Our antibiotics
stopped working so we desperately reach for human feces, used as medicine, to
save our butts. Literally. There has to be an explanation, right? Turns out that a
dietary additive that you’ve probably never heard of called trehalose was
GRASed into the American, European, and Canadian food supply in 2000, 2001,
and 2005, respectively. Trehalose is a sweetener that the food industry loves
because it improves the stability and texture of foods. It’s used in pasta, ice
cream, even beef. You can buy it by the kilogram on Amazon and throw it in
your coffee. But a 2018 publication in Nature showed that: 1) trehalose
promotes the growth of nasty, virulent strains of C. diff infection in an animal
model; and 2) the timing of implementation of trehalose into our food supply
coincides with the emergence of the C. diff epidemic with these exact strains
worldwide. It took eighteen years for us to identify the problem. So has trehalose
been taken off the market due to safety concerns? Unfortunately, no. “All you’ve
shown is an association, without proof of harm in humans.” See how that works?
It will be very difficult to roll back the ten thousand food additives we’ve
GRASed into existence.


     Closing the book on processed foods
           The thing about processed foods is that you’re starting with something that’s healthy in its
           natural state, and you are modifying it. As you progressively change that food, it becomes less
           and less nutritionally valuable. At some point, the food that started healthy becomes poison.
               If you go back one hundred years, this simply wasn’t a part of our diet. Take a moment to
           think about that: the sheer volume of man-made chemicals we’re putting into our bodies, and
           the unrealistic expectation that our microbiota will be able to process and eliminate them
           without any damage. It’s a shock that we don’t drop dead from this stuff and a total testament
           to the adaptability of our microbiome, even if this is likely contributing to mass bacterial
           extinction.
               It comes as no surprise that every 10 percent increase in consumption of ultra-processed
           foods is associated with more than a 10 percent increased risk of developing cancer and a 14
           percent risk of early death. So what happens when you hit American levels of consumption—
           50 or 60 percent?
               I don’t think that every food additive is harmful in the long term, but we don’t know and
           likely will never know. There’s only one foolproof way to protect yourself from the potential
           poisons in our diet—get rid of them!




Unhealthy fats
Not all fats are unhealthy, but most of the fat in the American diet is of the
unhealthy variety unfortunately. Study after study in an animal model has shown
that a high-fat diet causes an unhealthy balance in the microbiota, impairs
intestinal barrier function, and leads to the release of bacterial endotoxin. As you
recall from Chapter 1, this is the model of dysbiosis, and bacterial endotoxin has
been linked to autoimmunity, obesity, coronary artery disease, congestive heart
failure, type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer’s, alcoholic hepatitis, nonalcoholic fatty liver,
osteoarthritis, and even “low T” in men.
   Do the animal model findings translate to humans? Yes. A recent study in
humans held dietary fiber constant and varied the amount of fat in the diet—20,
30, or 40 percent of calories. After six months they saw the microbiome shift to
a progressively more inflammatory profile when fat was higher, confirmed with
higher systemic inflammation. More fat, more problems.
   So which fats are good and which are bad? The above study was done with
vegetable oil, which can often be partially hydrogenated and high in trans fats.
Other sources of trans fats are baked goods, chips, fried food, canned biscuits,
nondairy creamer, and margarine. There is universal agreement that trans fats are
unhealthy. Check the label for trans fats and don’t buy it!
   On the flip side, there is universal agreement that monounsaturated fats
(MUFA) and omega-3 polyunsaturated fats (PUFA) found predominantly in
plant foods are healthy! We see this validated in microbiome studies that show
oleic acid—a monounsaturated fat found in olive oil—and omega-3 PUFAs
promote the growth of beneficial microbes, correct dysbiosis, and reduce
bacterial endotoxin release. They even enhance microbial diversity. These fats
actually protect the microbiome.
   And then there’s saturated fat, predominantly found in animal foods as well as
in tropical oils like coconut oil and palm oil. Cardiologists are screaming and
shouting that it causes obesity, heart disease, and diabetes. Low-carb dieters
disagree, and Time magazine says “Butter is back.” But what does the
microbiome say? The results in the microbiome have been consistent. Saturated
fat encourages the growth of inflammatory microbes like Bilophila wadsworthia,
alters intestinal permeability, and leads to the release of bacteria endotoxin.
Translation: saturated fat causes dysbiosis. It even disrupts our normal biological
rhythm in a way that promotes obesity. If you care about the health of your
microbiome, then “Butter is not back” and we should probably rethink this ghee-
and coconut-oil-in-the coffee fad.
Animal protein
“So where do you get your protein from?” That’s the question that patients
always ask when I discuss a plant-based diet with them. I get it. We’ve been
taught that protein is the be-all and end-all of nutrition. Our obsession with
protein fuels the heaviest meat consumption on the entire planet. But what’s
interesting is that “where you get your protein from” is incredibly important to
gut health.
   The source of the protein, whether from plants or animals, can have very
different effects on the microbiome. For example, plant protein increases the
growth of anti-inflammatory species like Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus
while suppressing the destructive ones like Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium
perfringens. The result is correction of leaky gut.
   On the flip side, diets high in animal protein have consistently been associated
with increased growth of inflammatory microbes like Bilophila wadsworthia,
Alistipes, and Bacteroides. These bacteria produce toxins like amines, sulfides,
and secondary bile salts. Amines cause food sensitivity at baseline, and then
when you char meat it turns them into carcinogenic heterocyclic amines.
Hydrogen sulfide has been associated with ulcerative colitis. Secondary bile salts
have been associated with cancer of the colon, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, liver, pancreas, and biliary tract. No surprise, this consumption of
animal protein results in increased intestinal permeability and inflammation.
   And then there’s the association between animal protein and TMAO, which
has redefined our understanding of America’s number one killer—
cardiovascular disease. When people ingest L-carnitine (abundant in red meat
and some energy drinks and supplements) or certain choline (found in red meat,
liver, egg yolk, and dairy products), the gut bacteria produce trimethylamine N-
oxide, or TMAO. Increased TMAO means increased risk of heart disease,
stroke, Alzheimer’s, type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, peripheral artery
disease, congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation—to name a few.
Unhealthy food feeds unhealthy microbes that produce unhealthy compounds.
It’s a vicious cycle that’s only broken by replacing unhealthy food with healthy
food.
   The good news is that a plant-based diet promotes a gut microbiota that just
doesn’t know how to make TMAO. Studies show that about four weeks after
giving up red meat, people’s TMAO levels drop dramatically. This explains why
in The Lifestyle Heart Trial, Dr. Dean Ornish showed that through a low-fat
vegetarian diet, smoking cessation, stress management, and moderate exercise,
patients actually reversed coronary artery disease. Meanwhile the control group
got worse and worse.
   What’s interesting is that increased animal protein can produce weight loss in
the short term but causes a shift in the microbiome that’s bad for our gut health
in the long term. I suppose now would be a good time to have a little chat about
the fad diets that offer weight loss in exchange for heavy meat consumption . . .
Fad Diets
Let me make this clear . . . I don’t look down on people who do fad diets. In fact,
I applaud them for having the courage to change their diet in an effort to be
healthier. But the million-dollar question is, “Are these diets good for your
microbes?”
   Let’s start with the Paleo diet, our most popular and most often recommended
dietary approach today. The idea is that we should eat the way our ancestors ate
because modern agriculture is at odds with our ancestral biology. That means
meat, eggs, vegetables, fruit, nuts, and roots are on the menu while dairy, sugars,
grains, legumes, processed oils, salt, alcohol, and coffee are not. Some of this I
love; some of this I don’t.
   But who cares what I think? Let’s look at the science. In a recent study,
consumption of a long-term Paleolithic diet was associated with dramatically
higher TMAO levels, reduced Roseburia (protects against inflammatory bowel
disease), reduced Bifidobacterium (protects against irritable bowel and obesity),
and increased Hungatella (produces TMAO). In other words, the Paleo diet
shifted the microbiome away from health and toward disease. Even though all of
the groups in the study ate a similar amount of meat, they saw dramatic
differences in the amount of TMAO produced, with the highest level being in
those who were most strict in following the Paleo diet. Elimination of whole
grains was the main factor responsible for increased Hungatella and TMAO
levels, demonstrating that categorical eliminations can have unintended,
potentially serious consequences.
   Anyone want to guess what an even more restrictive Keto/Carnivore diet does
to the microbiome? In a groundbreaking study by Drs. Lawrence David and
Peter Turnbaugh, a group of people cycled between a completely “plant-based
diet,” which was rich in grains, legumes, fruits, and vegetables, and an “animal-
based diet,” which was composed of meats, eggs, and cheeses. This “animal-
based diet” could also be called the “Keto diet”—extremely low carb, very high
fat. It could also be called the “Carnivore diet”—100 percent animal products,
no plants.
   So what happened? There were dramatic changes of the study’s participants in
the microbiome in less than twenty-four hours. It didn’t take long. The animal-
based diet saw the disturbing emergence of inflammatory bacteria like Bilophila
wadsworthia, Alistipes putredinis, and Bacteroides. This was expected with high
levels of saturated fat and animal protein. Remember, these are the bacteria that
produce toxins like amines, sulfides, and secondary bile salts. Meanwhile, there
was starvation and recession of the healing microbes like Roseburia,
Eubacterium rectale, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii. Similar to the Paleo diet,
this is a shift away from health and toward disease. Perhaps the most disturbing
part is the rapid emergence of Bilophila wadsworthia, known to produce
hydrogen sulfide, which promotes inflammatory bowel disease. It’s alarming to
consider that in less than five days the foundation is being laid for the
development of Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis with this diet.
   But these low-carb, high-fat diets are helping people to lose weight, right?
Folks, we have to learn that you can lose weight, look great on the outside, and
be absolutely rotting on the inside. It’s short-term gain and long-term pain. Do
you know the average life expectancy of a professional body builder? It’s just
forty-seven years. Weight loss doesn’t always translate into better health.




To view the 55+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                                3
The Fiber Solution: Short-Chain Fatty Acids
and Postbiotics for the Win
                             Our guts are STARVING to be Fiber Fueled




So what can we do to restore order and bring out the best in our ’biota? Where
do we begin if we want to heal our guts to reverse or prevent illness? Is it
probiotics? Bone broth?
   Well, if you were sitting across from me in my office, I’d be going straight for
my secret weapon—fiber. I know what you’re thinking. “Fiber? Really? Fiber is,
like, the most boring thing on the entire planet, Dr. B,” or “You mean that gross
white powder my grandma mixes into a glass of water every morning so she can
poop?”
   And to that I’d say: Fair enough. Fiber has gotten a bad rap, and those
tasteless fiber supplements are only partly to blame. It’s also the fact that until
very recently we had absolutely no idea just how amazing fiber is for your gut
microbiota. You most likely have preconceived notions about it that make it hard
for me to make fiber cool or sexy. For a while now, the diet conversation has
been all about protein and, more recently, fat. Nobody has been talking about
boring old fiber. I’m here to tell you that fiber is the first, and potentially the
most powerful, solution to restoring health to your gut microbiota, and from
there your overall health.
   But for this to work I need you to unlearn what you think you already know.
I’m not talking about fiber as you know it. It’s time for a reboot. A renaissance.
A rebranding. It’s time to stop thinking about fiber as being vanilla and boring
and get to know it in a whole new light. Fiber is so much more than you once
thought it was. Yes, fiber is the real deal, folks. If by the end of this chapter you
want to intentionally mispronounce it as “FIRE,” I don’t blame you. I’m going
to resist that urge for this book, but if we ever meet in person I hope you’ll shake
my hand and tell me the secret code, “Fiber is FIRE.”
   Did you know that 97 percent of us consume an excess of protein, yet we still
constantly ask, “Where am I going to get my protein from?” We live in a country
with a pathologic protein obsession. Meanwhile, we are figuratively and literally
starving for fiber. “Starving?” you say. “In this country? Where nearly three in
four are overweight?” Absolutely. Your gut is completely FIBER STARVED.
Imagine your gut as a dried-out, postapocalyptic wasteland, with a lone
tumbleweed rolling through. That solitary tumbleweed represents your fiber!
Less than 3 percent of Americans get even the recommended minimum daily
intake. That means 97 percent of Americans are not receiving the minimal daily
recommended amount of fiber, let alone what I would characterize as optimal.
Of all of the essential nutrients, this may be our greatest, most prevalent
deficiency. Yet, we’re not talking about it and no one seems to be concerned.
Enough with the protein obsession; it’s time we turn our attention to the vital
question: “Where am I going to get my fiber from?”



Fiber, the phoenix: Let’s burn it down and watch it come back
stronger!
Okay, taking it from the top: What is fiber? In nature, fiber is a part of the plant
cellular structure. Plants have a total monopoly on this nutrient. So if you want
it, there’s only one way to naturally get it: from plants!
    From a nutritional perspective, fiber is a carb—it’s what we would refer to as
a complex carbohydrate. If you take multiple sugar molecules and link them
together, you’d get fiber. That doesn’t mean it behaves like sugar by any means.
It doesn’t. Digestion of refined sugar starts in the mouth and in about twenty
minutes it’s already been absorbed in the small intestine. Meanwhile, fiber
remains unblemished as it passes through your mouth, stomach, and even fifteen
to twenty feet of small intestine so that by the time it reaches your colon, it’s the
same molecule that went in your mouth.
    Two of the biggest myths about fiber are that all fiber is the same and that it
does nothing more than go in one end and shoot out the other like a torpedo.
Let’s dig deeper.
     Have you turned into a carbophobic?
          If just seeing the word “carb” gets your heart racing and your face flushing, then it’s
          happened. But don’t worry; it’s not your fault. There’s been so much negative press for carbs.
          They’re not very “in” and they haven’t been for quite some time. You’ve been taught that
          carbs are bad for you; they spike your blood sugar, increase your food cravings, and you need
          to avoid them if you want to lose weight. Is it true? Sometimes. But not in whole food form.
              Yes, refined, processed carbs like table sugar or high-fructose corn syrup, white bread or
          white flour will spike your blood sugar, leading to a vicious cycle of food addiction, weight
          gain, and constant hunger. That’s because they’ve been stripped of their fiber. As you’re about
          to learn, fiber is directly responsible for balancing our blood sugar and triggering our satiety
          hormones so that we know when to say, “That’s enough, thank you.”
              Complex, unrefined carbs found in whole plant foods are chock-full of fiber, vitamins, and
          minerals. In contrast to that vicious cycle above, complex carbs actually lower blood sugar—
          even prevent diabetes—and decrease weight and body mass. The point is that we shouldn’t
          make assumptions about our food based upon macro- or micronutrients. We need to look at
          whole foods. The fear surrounding carbs is appropriately placed with the refined carbs in
          processed foods, but completely misplaced with the unrefined carbs found in whole plant
          foods. Seriously, fruit is actually the low-hanging fruit!




Myth #1: All fiber is the same, and all you have to do is count grams.
You’ve been taught that all fiber is created equal—that whether it’s in your
breakfast cereal, the milky powder your grandma drinks, or in a granola bar, all
forms of fiber are interchangeable. All you need to do is count the number of
grams and you’re good to go. What you’ve been told is dead wrong.
   The source of the fiber you eat is critically important. The fiber in your cereal
or breakfast biscuit is not the same as the fiber in your quinoa. This is
conceptually similar to how the source of our fats and our protein determines the
impact on our microbiome. It’s an oversimplification to reduce fiber to a number
of grams and pretend that all grams are created equal. As you’re going to learn in
Chapter 4, I have a much better way to source your fiber.
   We’ve been taught to count grams of fiber for two reasons. One, it’s easy, and
we like easy. And two, we have no clue how many types of fiber actually exist in
nature. It’s incredibly difficult to analyze the chemical structure of dietary fiber,
and there are four hundred thousand plants on our planet, three hundred
thousand of them being edible. So there must be hundreds of thousands—if not
millions—of types of fiber in nature. But we haven’t gotten around to figuring
them all out yet.
   Given the complexities in analyzing dietary fiber, we’ve simplified it by
saying there are two basic forms of dietary fiber: soluble and insoluble. You can
tell which is which by submerging the fiber in water. If it dissolves, it’s soluble.
If it doesn’t, it’s insoluble. While I will occasionally make references to the
difference between soluble and insoluble fiber, just know that in both cases we
are talking about huge categories of fiber and that most plants contain some mix
of both.


Myth #2: That fiber just passes through us.
If you do a quick Google search on fiber, you’ll find the general health benefits
of fiber: It contributes to fantastic bowel movements by correcting diarrhea and
constipation and increasing the weight and size of your bowel movement, lowers
cholesterol, and controls blood sugar. These are all great things, and we should
be celebrating these health benefits of fiber, for sure! But at the same time we
have been doing the undersell of the century here, folks.
   We’ve all been taught that fiber pretty much goes in the mouth and out
your . . . well, you know, and along the way it sweeps some stuff out. And while
there may be some truth to these statements, we’re being excessively simple
about an incredibly complicated nutrient. So let’s take a closer look.
   We humans lack the ability to process fiber by ourselves. Sure, we’ve got
some enzymes called glycoside hydrolases that help us break down complex
carbs, but we only have seventeen of them—just seventeen!—and none of them
are designed for breaking down the larger molecules like fiber. In other words,
we big strong humans are literally incapable of processing fiber on our own.
   Now, if we lived encapsulated in a sterile bubble free from bacteria, we would
never know the true power of fiber. But we get by with a little help from our
friends. Because guess where you can find lots and lots of fiber and complex
carbohydrate-processing enzymes? Yes, in our gut microbiota. Compared to the
shockingly inadequate seventeen that belong to us, our gut microbiota may
contain upward of sixty thousand of these helpful enzymes.
   The fact that our microbiomes contain this insane number of digestive
enzymes makes sense when you remember that there are three hundred thousand
edible plants and potentially millions of types of fiber in our diet. By outsourcing
fiber digestion to our microbes, we are taking advantage of their adaptability.
Every single plant, every single type of fiber requires a unique team of microbes
working in concert to get the job done. It’s demanding work, but what follows is
magic. The breakdown of fiber by gut bacteria unleashes what I believe is the
most healing nutrient in all of nature: (*Drumroll, please!*) short-chain fatty
acids (SCFAs).
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) to the rescue
We’ve learned about our “good bacteria.” But how do these powerful microbes
actually do their incredible work? Good bacteria have the ability to transform
certain types of fiber into electric, organic power manna—they’re called SCFAs.
   There are three main types of SCFAs: acetate, propionate, and butyrate. These
are literally as they are described: short-chain, meaning made up of two, three, or
four carbon atoms connected together in acetate, propionate, and butyrate
chemical compounds, respectively. The three SCFAs work in the body as a
complementary group. In the interest of understanding them better we generally
study them in isolation, but always keep in mind that there are studies and then
there’s real life. In real life, these molecules are meant to work together, in the
proper balance, for the good of your health.
   Each type of fiber we consume produces a different mix of these SCFAs when
processed by good bacteria. But don’t worry about trying to get specific ones for
specific problems—the key here, which you’ll learn all about in Chapter 4, is to
consume a diverse mix of fibers, meaning a diverse mix of plants, to get the
benefits of all of them.



The different “-biotics” for gut health: pre, pro, and post
Before we go any further into the science of SCFAs I want to explain something.
I’m sure you’ve heard of probiotics; we’ve all seen those yogurt commercials.
Probiotics are all the rage and have been for some time. But have you ever heard
of prebiotics or postbiotics? In short, probiotics are living bacteria that have been
demonstrated to have beneficial qualities to us humans. Prebiotics induce the
growth or beneficial qualities of the probiotics. They’re essentially food for the
good bugs. Postbiotics are the healthy compounds produced by bacterial
metabolism.
   In other words:


     Prebiotics = Food for healthy gut microbes
     Probiotics = Microbes with beneficial qualities
     Postbiotics = Compounds produced by gut microbes


  Taken a step further . . .
    Prebiotics + Probiotics = Postbiotics
   The word “prebiotic” literally did not exist until 1995, but it is increasingly
becoming a part of the American vernacular. It is defined as “a substrate that is
selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit.” In other
words, prebiotics (the substrate) are utilized by the microorganisms (probiotics)
to confer a health benefit by producing postbiotics. Which is just the nerdy way
of saying my formula: prebiotics + probiotics = postbiotics.
   Not all fiber is prebiotic. Most soluble fiber is prebiotic, while most insoluble
fiber is not. We often call insoluble fiber roughage. The roughage is the part
that’s untouched by our digestion or our microbes, and therefore launches out
the bottom like a torpedo.
   Fiber isn’t the only prebiotic though! Resistant starch, found in foods like
oats, rice, potatoes, and legumes, is technically not fiber but it behaves in a very
similar way to soluble fiber. It passes through the small intestine unblemished
and is fermented by our colon microbes. A mother’s breast milk also contains
something called human milk oligosaccharides, or HMOs, that function like
soluble fiber and feed the baby’s developing gut microbiota. So if we want
postbiotic SCFAs, we should get prebiotic soluble fiber and resistant starch in
our diet and we should breastfeed our young ones.
   All roads point to SCFAs for human health. They are the dominant driver of
gut health and they have benefits throughout the body.


     Going beyond fiber for next-level prebiotics
          While fiber is a strong and reliable source for prebiotics, healthy prebiotics exist in other plant
          compounds as well. The healing properties of numerous plants—including cocoa, green and
          black tea, pomegranate, apples, and blueberries—are at least partially attributable to
          phytochemical polyphenols, which are antioxidant compounds. Ninety to 95 percent of
          polyphenols make their way down to the colon, where they’re magically transformed by our
          microbes and activated to their health-promoting form. Similarly, omega-3 polyunsaturated
          fatty acids found in walnuts have been shown to be prebiotic. Yay, healthy fats! So while
          polyphenols and omega-3’s don’t produce short-chain fatty acids like fiber, they do have an
          effect on our gut microbes and cause the release of health-promoting compounds, also known
          as postbiotics.




Nutritional karma and the power of positive momentum
Now let’s come back to SCFAs, your good gut bacteria, and fiber. Healthy
bacteria can’t survive without fiber. In fact, studies have shown that fiber
consumption increases the growth of healthy bacteria species such as
Lactobacilli, Bifidobacteria, and Prevotella. Eating fiber also increases the
diversity of species within the gut. These beneficial effects are what qualify it as
a prebiotic. The prebiotic effects of fiber feed and nourish the healthy microbes
in our gut. Your gut bacteria goes from slumped over and worn out to energized,
steadfast, and powerful.
   Those reinvigorated microbes release SCFAs from fiber to heal the colon.
First, the short-chain fatty acids do as their name suggests and make the colon
more acidic. This change prevents the growth of inflammatory, pathogenic
bacteria—the bad guys. Next, SCFAs take it a step further and directly suppress
dangerous strains like E. coli and Salmonella. In Chapter 1 we learned that
dysbiosis is characterized by a loss of balance between the healthy microbes and
the inflammatory ones. By suppressing inflammatory microbes, SCFAs are
helping to restore that balance.
   Now we’re building momentum toward a healthier gut. Fiber is feeding the
healthy microbes, and they’re multiplying. As they increase in number, they’re
producing more and more SCFAs for us even though you’re consuming the same
amount of fiber. You have trained your gut to produce SCFAs, and it’s become
increasingly efficient at doing that. These SCFAs are suppressing the
inflammatory microbes, giving the healthy microbes an even more decisive
advantage over the inflammatory ones. This is a form of positive health
momentum, and it starts building on itself as we get more and more healthy
microbes producing more and more SCFAs. But keep in mind, the linchpin here
is fiber. Everything I’ve described is contingent on fueling your gut microbes
with prebiotic fiber.
   As you can see, regular consumption of fiber trains your gut microbiome not
only to process fiber, but to actually get even more beneficial postbiotics out of
it! In exercise we call it muscle memory. In life we call it practice. Either way,
our microbes are no different. If you regularly expose them to fiber in your diet,
they will adapt to that regular exposure and get really, really good at extracting
SCFAs for you. With that comes a myriad of benefits that I’m just starting to tell
you about.
   But here’s the problem—the flip side is also true: a diet lacking in fiber will
drain your gut of its fiber-extracting capabilities and make it less capable of
getting postbiotics from your food. When you don’t practice, you lose your skill,
right? Just two weeks on a low-fiber diet causes an altered gut microbiota that
starts to literally eat away at the intestinal lining, causing breakdown of the
protective barrier and susceptibility to disease. Not good. And remember how I
said that 97 percent of us aren’t even getting minimal fiber? And that six of the
top ten causes of death in the United States are caused by nutrition? And that
most of those are linked with dysbiosis of the gut? You’re starting to get the
FIRE for fiber burning a little now, aren’t you?
   This is a really key point that I want to get across. You can call it nutritional
karma—“do good and you will receive good.” Or you could say that you’re not
what you eat but what your gut microbiota eats. The point is that your food
choices leave an imprint in your microbiome and those choices will either train
your gut bacteria to take care of and protect you or empower evildoers to hurt
you. Your choice.
   What else can SCFAs do? Well, they also fix up your colonocytes, which are
the cells lining your colon. Maybe you’ve been led to believe that fiber provides
no energy since it’s not absorbed? Believe it or not, 10 percent of our daily
caloric requirements are met with fiber-derived SCFAs as the energy source. In
fact, the main source of energy for our colonocytes are SCFAs, providing up to
70 percent of their energy. Specifically, the colonocytes seem to love chowing
down on the SCFA butyrate, so most of the butyrate is taken up by the gut lining
where it contributes to a healthy colon. Like taking a beautiful historic home
that’s been run haggard and restoring it to its original glory, butyrate fixes up the
lining of the gut.


“Doc, how do I fix leaky gut?” Here is your solution.
Back in Chapter 1 we talked about dysbiosis, which is when damage to the gut
microbiota causes increased intestinal permeability, which leads to release of
noxious bacterial endotoxin. Remember that the gut wall is meant to act like a
physical barrier exerting control over what stuff gets access to your blood. After
all, it’s in the gut that your body is most exposed to the outside world. This
blood–gut barrier is meant for protection, but holes can occur in the wall
allowing bacteria, antigens, and toxic substances like bacterial endotoxin to get
past the intestinal wall, activating the immune system. This increased intestinal
permeability, which some refer to as “leaky gut,” happens when tight junction
proteins that are meant to keep cells connected to one another end up being
broken, thereby creating gaps between the cells. Good news: SCFA butyrate
actually repairs leaky gut by increasing the expression of tight junction proteins
and has been shown to actually decrease endotoxin release.
   And while we’re on the topic, inflammation caused by increased intestinal
permeability affects the function of the intestinal lining, including its nerves and
muscles. This leads to diarrhea or constipation, bloating, and abdominal pain.
Unfortunately, even just transient inflammation of the gut and intestinal
hyperpermeability can cause sensitization and altered motility that persists long
after resolution of the inflammation. You may recall from Chapter 1 that the
hallmarks of irritable bowel syndrome are altered gut motility and increased
visceral hypersensitivity. SCFA butyrate has been shown to increase colonic
motility and decrease visceral hypersensitivity. So if you suffer from IBS, then
you want this.
   Let’s take a step back for a moment here, folks. What I’m telling you is that
SCFAs are a vital nutrient for intestinal health. They are the dominant energy
source for your colon, support a healthy gut microbiota, repair leaky gut, reduce
release of bacterial endotoxin, promote intestinal motility, and decrease visceral
hypersensitivity. Read that sentence again: Let it sink in. I just described the cure
for dysbiosis. I believe that dysbiosis is at the root of most modern disease.
SCFAs can correct dysbiosis, and that’s only the beginning of the health benefits
they offer.
   If correcting dysbiosis, supporting a healthy gut microbiota, repairing your
colon, and reversing leaky gut weren’t enough, this superhero energy fans out
throughout the body and works its healing magic. Let’s take a look at some of
the most impressive capabilities of SCFAs beyond the gut.
Immune system and inflammation
Just beyond the wall of your intestine sits 70 percent of your immune system.
This is your little army. When infection or even cancerous cells arise, it is the
responsibility of your immune system to clear it out. Sounds simple, but it’s not.
How do you separate friend from foe when there are thirty-nine trillion microbes
in the gut, thirty trillion human cells in the body, and your “host” is scarfing
down three pounds of food per day, most of which is some deviant form of real
food? That’s a ton of responsibility. The slightest bit of confusion by the
immune system leads to failure. Overreact and you get allergic or autoimmune
issues. Underreact and you get infections or even cancer. So how do we get it
juuuussssstttttt right?
   Well, SCFAs are the way that our gut microbiome connects to our immune
system. It’s how they communicate with each other. SCFAs act as a crisis
negotiator, getting the immune system to cool off if it’s too hot.
   Dysbiosis and the release of bacterial endotoxin promote inflammation, which
is a good thing when you have an infection or injury but isn’t good when it’s
constant and unneeded. It’s unrelenting low-grade stress on the body, including
the immune system. Thankfully, SCFAs address both dysbiosis and bacterial
endotoxin release, which makes them a great first step toward regulating the root
cause of all inflammatory conditions.
   Beyond that, SCFAs have been shown to inhibit three of the most powerful
inflammatory signals in the body: NF-κΒ, IFN-y, and TNF-α. I’ve heard people
say that “your genes load the gun and your lifestyle pulls the trigger.” If that’s
the case, then SCFAs disarm the gun and take it out of your hand. SCFAs make
immune cells more tolerant to gut bacteria and reduce gut inflammatory markers.
Believe it or not, they even make immune cells more tolerant to your food,
helping to prevent food allergy and sensitivity. SCFAs can even communicate
directly to an important part of our immune system called regulatory T cells,
which you can think of as “suppressor” cells that cool off the immune system,
encourage tolerance to your own cells, and prevent autoimmune disease. More
on that in a bit.
   We’ve seen more evidence of the power of fiber fueled SCFAs against
inflammation in studying patients with Crohn’s disease, a form of inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD). In Crohn’s, the immune system attacks the intestine,
causing inflammation. It can affect any part of the digestive tract, from your lips
to your backside. The inflammation in Crohn’s can be so severe that it can
actually erode through the wall of the intestine and cause abscesses or a
connection between two parts that isn’t supposed to exist, which we call a
fistula. Suffice it to say that Crohn’s is a horrible, debilitating condition that is
becoming increasingly common in the Western world.
   So let’s take a look at how Crohn’s disease develops and you’ll see how
SCFAs could make a difference. In people with Crohn’s, we see decreased
bacterial diversity, loss of butyrate-producing organisms, specifically
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and an overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria,
specifically E. coli. But this isn’t just any E. coli. . . . No, no, no. This is an
extra-nasty variety called adherent-invasive E. coli. Gives me the chills typing it,
that’s how nasty it is. Anyway, this E. coli behaves like a sociopath just broken
out of prison, and immediately starts unleashing pro-inflammatory proteins like
a flamethrower as it proliferates, further enhancing dysbiosis and the rise of
more E. coli. This loss of balance in the gut, decrease in good bacteria, and
increase in E. coli affects the tight junctions and leads to increased intestinal
permeability. There is a strong association between depletion of F. prausnitzii
and the immune system no longer being tolerant of the intestinal microbiota,
meaning the immune system starts going haywire. Meanwhile, the absent
intestinal barrier allows E. coli to invade the intestinal wall, which activates the
immune system to attack the E. coli. And there you have it—inflammatory
bowel disease.
   As you can see, just like in life, when bad things happen in the body it’s a
series of events that lead to the problem. If we were functioning in the business
world, we’d do a root cause analysis to figure out the source of the problem and
address it. Could a fiber-starved gut be the root cause of Crohn’s disease?
   Well, yes: SCFAs are relevant in protection from Crohn’s disease on a
mechanistic level because they make immune cells more tolerant to gut bacteria,
help suppress an overactive immune system, repair leaky gut, and create
protective bacteria to keep the gut healthy. Additionally, in a recent study a
semi-vegetarian high-fiber diet basically crushed an omnivorous diet in terms of
keeping people with Crohn’s disease free of disease activity and in remission.
Those on a semi-vegetarian diet maintained a 92 percent remission rate
compared to just 33 percent among omnivores in a prospective trial.
   And in similar fashion, what if a high-fiber, plant-centered diet proved to be
beneficial for other autoimmune, inflammatory conditions? Well, it does. In
humans, a vegan diet has repeatedly been demonstrated to be beneficial for
disease remission in rheumatoid arthritis. For example, in a randomized
controlled trial 41 percent of patients on a vegan diet showed clinical
improvement of their rheumatoid arthritis compared to just 4 percent on a “well-
balanced” non-vegan diet.
   So not only do SCFAs correct dysbiosis and heal leaky gut, but they also
create a powerful link between the microbiome and immune system that serves
to make the immune system work properly. Adequately fueled by SCFAs, the
immune system does its job confidently and effectively. Without the SCFAs, the
immune system becomes insecure, confused, paranoid, and weak. In other
words, the immune system is dependent on gut microbes to support it with
SCFAs. The gut microbes are dependent on you to offer fiber fuel that can be
transformed into SCFAs. Again, these gut microbes aren’t just passively along
for the ride. They play an active, central role in our health.
Cancer
As we’ve learned, SCFAs correct dysbiosis, fix leaky gut, reverse bacterial
endotoxemia, and optimize the immune system. Those effects create a good
foundation for the prevention of cancer. We know from Chapter 1 that dysbiosis
has been associated with several types of cancer: colorectal, gastric, esophageal,
pancreatic, laryngeal, gallbladder, and even breast cancer. But is there anything
special about SCFAs that can help us in the fight against cancer beyond just
“healing the gut”?
  Let’s start with the basic premise that cancer development requires unchecked
cell multiplication and growth. In order for this to happen, the DNA in the
malignant cell needs to be able to copy itself before dividing into two cells.
Histone deacetylases, or HDACs, are required to allow this process to occur. So
if you could shut down the DNA copy process by blocking the HDACs, you’d
effectively be pulling the emergency brake on the runaway cancer train.
   Since the 1970s we’ve known that butyrate inhibits HDACs, altering gene
expression in malignant cells and, as a result, inhibiting the root of cancer
formation—unchecked proliferation. But when you have dangerous cells that
you’re dealing with, it’s not enough to just slow down their growth. You need to
stop them in their tracks, and the way this is done is by causing apoptosis, or
programmed cell death. Sounds violent, but it’s actually a normal part of cellular
regulation and is by no means rare. Every day between fifty and seventy billion
cells fall on the sword in altruistic fashion to protect the greater good of the
whole organism. SCFAs help us in the fight against cancer by specifically
eliminating cells that could turn into cancer.
   Once again, studies on people who consume a high-fiber, plant-centered diet
and reduce their cancer risk offer proof that these principles really translate to
our real life. Let’s go straight to the source and start with the most powerful,
most well-respected study on the topic by Dr. Andrew Reynolds in The Lancet.
He pulled information together from 243 prospective studies. This is a scale that
is rarely seen in clinical research, yet at the same time he restricted his data to
high-quality studies: prospective cohorts and interventional randomized trials. In
the end, fiber found in whole foods was shown to protect against colorectal,
breast, and esophageal cancer. Further, high dietary fiber in the study was still
pretty low—between 25 and 29 grams per day. In the Western world, our fiber
consumption is so poor that even the high-fiber consumers are below goal.
Nonetheless, the results suggested that as you extend your dietary fiber intake
higher, the protection against colorectal and breast cancer only gets greater.
   Colon cancer is the number two cause of cancer death in the United States
right now. Number two! And that’s despite billions of dollars spent on our colon
cancer screening program. Dietary fiber has been repeatedly shown to protect us
from colon cancer. For example, in a prospective study of 1,575 people with
nonmetastatic colorectal cancer, consuming more dietary fiber helped people
live longer. For every 5 grams of increased fiber consumption, there was an 18
percent lower risk of death from colorectal cancer and 14 percent lower risk of
death from any cause during follow-up.
   And just to put the cherry on top, three major studies—a large 2017 meta-
analysis, the prospective EPIC-Oxford study, and the Adventist Health Study—
all reached the same conclusion when it comes to diet and cancer risk. A plant-
centered, fiber fueled diet lowers your risk of developing cancer. Mic drop.
Heart Disease, Stroke, Diabetes, and Weight Loss
So SCFAs and fiber offer protection from cancer, the number two cause of death
in the United States. How about heart disease and stroke—the number one and
number five causes of death? In the same mega meta-analysis on dietary fiber
published in The Lancet, Dr. Reynolds and his science squad also found dietary
fiber consumption to be associated with lower body weight, reduced incidence of
type 2 diabetes, lower total cholesterol, and lower systolic blood pressure. These
just so happen to be the risk factors for coronary artery disease and stroke.
   SCFAs affect multiple tissues in a concerted action to improve blood sugar
regulation. They help protect against glucose intolerance, improve insulin
response in the pancreas, and suppress fatty acids in the liver and peripheral
tissues. This isn’t exactly a revolutionary concept. There are studies dating back
to the 1980s suggesting that soluble fiber is protective against type 2 diabetes.
But modern studies, such as the recent Science article by Dr. Liping Zhao, dug
more deeply and have shown us that following a high-fiber diet promotes the
growth of SCFA-producing microbes that improve blood sugar regulation.
   It’s not just what you eat but the effect it has on your microbiota that
determines your diabetes risk. There’s something that was originally called the
“lentil effect,” but now we call it the “second meal effect,” that illustrates this
idea. If you give two people an amount of bread or lentils for lunch that have the
same number of calories, you will of course see less of a sugar spike with the
lentils. No surprise. But then these two people both have white bread for dinner,
you’ll still see less of a sugar spike in the person who had lentils for lunch. Same
meal at dinner, but different effects based upon what you ate for lunch. We now
understand that this happens because the bacteria that we empowered at lunch
are working their SCFA magic to protect us at dinner. Score one for legumes, if
you’re keeping track.
   SCFAs also lower cholesterol by having direct control over the critical
enzyme in cholesterol formation and by increasing excretion of cholesterol in
bile. Further, SCFAs directly activate a receptor in fat cells that decreases fatty
acid uptake, and therefore suppresses fat accumulation.
   Each of these mechanisms protects you from obesity. Additionally, SCFAs
promote the release of satiety hormones that tell you when you’ve had enough.
This is a wildly underrated benefit that we are sacrificing with our current highly
processed, low-fiber diet. It allows you to feel nice and adequately full without
crossing the line to where you need a pair of sweatpants, a three-hour nap, and
an energy drink to get your day back on track. (Not that there’s anything wrong
with sweatpants!) When you are eating real food, nature works the way it’s
supposed to and you simply stop eating at the right time without counting
calories and without overeating. As proof of concept, a randomized crossover
study recently showed people experienced greater satiety and increased satiety
hormones after eating a plant-based burger with tofu than after eating a pork and
cheese burger, even though the two meals were matched for energy and
macronutrients. Same number of calories, same macros, but better appetite
control with the plants. Shocking, right?
   Finally, patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease have been found to
have depleted levels of butyrate-producing gut bacteria. In animal models
SCFAs have been shown to protect against congestive heart failure and high
blood pressure. More recently they’ve also been shown to prevent
atherosclerosis by maintaining gut barrier function and limiting bacterial
endotoxin release, which leads to less vascular inflammation. A recent study in
humans with congestive heart failure found an absence of SCFA-producing
microbes and an increase in TMAO-producing microbes. These patients had less
butyrate and more TMAO coursing through their blood. And so we now
understand at least in part why a plant-centered diet is good for the heart. SCFAs
are the antithesis of TMAO.
Cognition
Like a Roman warrior throwing a spear, the superhero bacteria in our gut also
unleash SCFAs all the way upstairs to the brain. What’s interesting is that many
molecules cannot travel to the brain due to a wall of protection called the blood–
brain barrier. Most molecules are stopped there at the wall, like being stopped at
the VIP line at the most exclusive club in New York City. (I wouldn’t know
what that’s like because I’m a nerd and have never been, but I watched enough
Entourage to at least be able to pretend.) So imagine that when the SCFAs show
up, the velvet rope is withdrawn and they’re given free access to the hottest club,
our most precious organ, the brain.
   On the other side of that velvet rope, SCFAs continue to work their magic.
The same chemical that reverses dysbiosis, heals leaky gut, strengthens the gut
microbiota, optimizes the immune system, and regulates appetite and
metabolism also connects the gut microbiome to cerebral function. The effects
are once again broad and powerful.
   You know how many people with leaky gut also complain of brain fog? And
how we also discussed above that SCFAs can activate tight junction proteins to
repair increased permeability in the gut? Well, it appears that SCFAs work
similar magic on the blood–brain barrier.
   SCFA butyrate has demonstrated a profound effect on improving learning and
memory. This has been demonstrated in models of Alzheimer’s, heavy metal
toxicity, traumatic brain injury, and even neurologic infections (which sounds
terrifying). I will tell you firsthand that the mental clarity that I’ve had since
changing my diet has been life changing for me. Being totally real, there’s no
way I could’ve written this book before. I didn’t have the stamina, focus, or
neural plasticity.
   Speaking of Alzheimer’s, one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease is the
accumulation of amyloid plaques between nerve cells in the brain. Researchers
are currently working on treatments for Alzheimer’s to block the production of
amyloid. Millions if not billions of dollars are being spent on this. While they
continue that quest, I want you to know that laboratory studies suggest that
SCFAs interfere with the formation of this exact same amyloid.
   Laboratory studies also show that butyrate protects the brain in models of
Parkinson’s disease. This is quite interesting when you consider that human
studies have found that patients with Parkinson’s disease have lower levels of
the bacteria that produce SCFAs and, as expected, lower levels of SCFAs in
their stool. For what it’s worth, Parkinson’s disease patients almost all have
digestive issues, with constipation being the most common among them.
   Finally, children on a high-fiber diet demonstrate better cognitive control
(multitasking, working memory, and maintaining focus) than children who eat a
lower-fiber diet. So SCFAs may help ADHD. I’d far rather kids eat a salad than
take Ritalin.


Bringing back fiber
Dr. Justin Sonnenburg showed that Westernization has led to a loss of gut
microbial diversity in his study that compares the Hadza of Tanzania to
Americans. The Hadza are one of the last remaining hunter-gatherer societies on
the planet and provide insights into what our life and our microbiome may have
looked like in primitive times. They consume 100 or more grams of fiber a day
in their food, and during a year will include around six hundred plants in their
diet. The average American gets a pathetic 15 grams of fiber per day and has
fifty or fewer species of plants in their diet. The differences in the microbiota are
profound. The Hadza have about 40 percent more diversity than the average
American and about 30 percent more diversity than the average Brit.
   Consider that African Americans have sixty-five times more colon cancer than
rural Africans. Sixty-five times! One interesting study involved switching the
diets of a group of African Americans and native Africans for two weeks. The
Africans did a high-fat, low-fiber diet while the African Americans did a high-
fiber, low-fat diet. Do you want to guess what happened?
   When the native Africans began eating our American diet, they saw their
SCFA butyrate levels decline and their TMAO levels increase. The reciprocal
effect ended up being true for the African Americans. “Africanization” of the
diet increased butyrate by 2.5-fold while “Westernization” cut butyrate
quantities in half. Remember how secondary bile salts are known to cause colon
cancer? A typical African diet reduced colonic secondary bile acids by 70
percent, while the Western diet increased them by 400 percent.
   One last little mind-blowing nugget I want to leave you with: Dr. Sonnenburg
also did a mouse study showing that the Western diet induced loss of microbial
diversity that could be compounded over a series of generations. If your
grandmother had twelve hundred species of microbes in her gut as a child, but
by the time your mother was born she had nine hundred, that’s what your mother
got. Then if your mother loses three hundred species, now you start off at six
hundred—half of what your grandmother had. Perhaps it comes as no surprise in
this study, the main factor that protected against this generational loss of
diversity was adequate prebiotic fiber consumption. Granted, this is just an
animal study. But it’s impossible to re-create in humans and it really makes
sense.


If it seems too good to be true, it might just be that we’ve been ignoring it
The benefits of postbiotic SCFAs may seem a little too good to be true, but the
science is real. SCFAs aren’t just important, they’re absolutely vital to gut
health. They offer a solution to dysbiosis by correcting leaky gut and reducing
bacterial endotoxemia. They feed and empower the healthy microbes in your gut
so they can do their job! They also play a role in human health throughout the
entire body. They offer protection from the most deadly diseases in the United
States. That by itself should make it the talk of the town, the focus of our
national conversation in our quest to better health. Yet this superstar languishes
in anonymity. It’s time to change that. I’m building a fiber bandwagon. Who’s
coming with me? Invite your friends. Grab your family. Let’s be loud and proud
so they can hear us. It’s time for us all to be Fiber Fueled.




To view the 65+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
PART II
          THE FIBER FUELED APPROACH
                                                                               4
Eat the Rainbow to Find Your Pot of Gold
   Why diversity of plants should be on your mind every time you eat




Now that we’ve established the incredible health benefits of being Fiber
Fueled, it’s time to count our daily grams of fiber and load up on Wheaties,
Fiber One bars, and Metamucil, right? Not so fast, my friends!
   In 2017 I sat in the front row of a jam-packed, standing-room-only lecture in
Chicago. It was Digestive Disease Week, the biggest meeting of
gastroenterologists, surgeons, nutritionists, and researchers in the world, with
close to twenty thousand nerds (like me) from 150 countries. I was there to hear
Dr. Rob Knight speak. Dr. Knight is a god of gut health, in my opinion. He
created the American Gut Project in 2012, the largest and most diverse study of
microbes and microbiomes of the industrialized world. Dr. Knight was at the
podium to announce the greatest predictor of a healthy microbiome using the
full, unprecedented strength of his American Gut database. An announcement
coming from the highest-quality source we have that would redefine how we
think of gut health. His finding?


     The single greatest predictor of a healthy gut microbiome is
     the diversity of plants in one’s diet.

  That’s right. Not Metamucil, not simply counting grams of fiber, but the
diversity of plants in your diet. More specifically, he found that the consumption
of thirty different plants in a given week was the greatest predictor of gut
microbial diversity. Believe it or not, this was far more powerful than whether
you self-identify as “vegan,” “vegetarian,” or “omnivore.” Why? Well, you can
be a junk food vegan and eat very few plants and you can eat a Paleo diet that
emphasizes plant-based diversity, and this can actually be a healthy diet with the
proper modifications. It all comes back to diversity of plants.
   Since you’ve been following along closely, I bet you’re not too surprised by
this. In Chapter 2 we saw the effects of just five days on a plant-based diet for
gut health, which were dramatic when compared to five days on an animal-based
diet. We also know from Chapter 3 how important fiber, which is found in
plants, is to gut health—specifically how important prebiotic fiber is, because it
can be transformed into postbiotic SCFAs by our probiotic gut microbes. And
we know that there are innumerable types of fiber in nature, and every plant
provides a distinct mix that requires a unique blend of microbes to process it. A
diet that maximizes a variety of dietary fibers and resistant starches supports the
diverse microbial community that’s necessary to process it. As proven by the
Hazda population, the more fiber and plant diversity, the more diversity in the
microbiota. Why is diversity important? Because the adaptability of our gut
microbiota allows us to unlock the healing power of SCFAs. We need a team of
microbes to get all the benefits.
   Dr. Knight’s American Gut Project study also found that people who
consumed an increased diversity of plants had a greater representation of SCFA-
producing bacteria. Remember in the last chapter when we discussed training
your gut with fiber? Regular exercise forces your muscles to adapt and get
stronger. Similarly, giving your gut regular practice with fiber increases the
representation of fiber-metabolizing, SCFA-producing bugs that are
hyperefficient at extracting the SCFAs for you—an adapted, stronger gut, if you
will. You get better at things the more you practice, right? Well, so does your
gut.
   As we know from Chapter 2, the composition of our microbiome is
determined in large part by the foods we eat. Dietary choices lead to the rise and
fall of microbes within our gut minute by minute. Every single plant type has a
community of gut microbes that thrive when that food is present and languish if
that food is removed. Therefore, it makes sense that the diversity within our
microbiome would be proportional to the diversity of plants in our diet. More
plant-based diversity = stronger, healthier microbiota = stronger, healthier you.
   Although our food technology continues to rapidly progress and we have
increased availability of food, the diversity in our diet is plummeting. There are
approximately four hundred thousand varieties of plants on Earth, of which
about three hundred thousand are edible. But combined globally we consume
only around two hundred species in total. Folks, this means we’re eating only
one out of every fifteen hundred edible plants on this planet.
   Not to mention that just three crops—rice, maize, and wheat—contribute
nearly 60 percent of calories and proteins humans obtain from plants.
Consolidation in high-yield crops is a lot easier for the food production system
than supporting diversity. In the last century alone we’ve abandoned 75 percent
of the plant diversity in our agricultural practices as farmers worldwide have
been pressured to use genetically uniform, high-yielding varieties. In other
words, our modern food systems are efficiently producing calories at the expense
of nutrients and biodiversity.
   What this means is that plant-based diversity in your diet will not happen by
accident. It happens by making this your core dietary philosophy, shunning the
path that our food system wants you to take. The good news is that in the pages
that follow I’m going to help you maximize your plant-based diversity as a
celebration of nature’s bounty.



Plant-based diversity: Make it the golden rule
Plant-based diversity is in fact so powerful, so life- and health-changing, that it
should be our Golden Rule of eating. By following the one Golden Rule of
healthy eating you can have it all—the flavors, smells, and textures from food
that you love, food that also just so happens to bring you more vitality and health
rather than taking it away. Food that makes you live longer, look better, and feel
better. Food that heals and improves your gut microbiome. Food that makes you
feel sexy, look sexy, and want more sexy time. I’ve lived it firsthand, and I’ve
witnessed it in my patients.
   When you maximize plant-based diversity, you make a choice that grants you
better health—you choose food that nourishes and sustains your optimal health
rather than the foods that zap your energy and beat up your gut microbiota until
dysbiosis, the root cause of disease, sets in. By focusing on diversity of plants,
you maximize the different nutrients that your food contains to reverse your
medical problems and even heal the ones that you don’t yet realize exist. And by
choosing plant diversity, you are fueling your microbiome with the scientifically
proven number one determinant of a healthy gut and unleashing the healing
power of SCFAs throughout the entire body.
   We’ve made health too complicated with our extensive lists of foods to avoid,
complex percentages of fats-to-protein-to-carb ratios, elimination diets, calorie
counting, even weighing our food—and despite all these rules, we’re not getting
any better. It just doesn’t need to be this complicated. Diversity of plants. That’s
it. That’s all you have to remember. Done. No more annoying food lists. If you
follow this one rule, it will lead you to better health. And it will always be the
truth no matter what happens: No matter what changes on this planet or in our
lifestyles, this core tenet of better health will stay the same.
    You might be hearing “plant-based diversity” and wondering, “But aren’t
vegans—who subsist on plant-based protein including lots of beans—suffering
from nutrient deficiencies?” One of the big fears with the vegan—or plant-based
—diet is that we’ll be missing out on critical micronutrients. Rest assured: A
2014 study compared the overall nutritional value of multiple different diets
(vegan, vegetarian, semi-vegetarian, pesco-vegetarian, and omnivorous) and
found the vegan diet to be the most nutritionally complete while the omnivorous
diet received the lowest score.
    This approach to eating always delivers beyond expectation—you may do it to
fix your diabetes, for example, but along the way you’re fixing everything else,
too, including the stuff that’s not even become a problem yet. The Golden Rule
of plant-based diversity is both healing and preventative. It’s incredibly
powerful.
    If you make it your core philosophy for how you choose to eat on a daily
basis, this one simple rule will open up a world of possibility for you. No more
calorie counting, eating tasteless diet foods, or restricting portion sizes. You can
eat as much as you want and still be your ideal body weight and have better
health. Let me repeat that: You can eat as much as you want and be your ideal
body weight. Yes, I said that. I know this seems like a crazy concept in the
context of what’s been dominating our health and diet culture for decades, but
it’s real and it works. If you think about all the herbs, flavors, textures, and
varieties of health-promoting plant food that you can eat without restriction—
that’s wild. And so exciting!


     Every plant has its own unique mix of gut-healing
     fiber
               Barley has a prebiotic fiber called beta-glucan that promotes the growth of healthy
               microbes, lowers total and LDL cholesterol, and helps regulate blood sugar. On a side
               note, barley is also rich in selenium, which is important for thyroid health and may
               prevent autoimmune thyroid disease.
               Whole oats are also high in beta-glucan. In addition, oats have phenolic acids that offer
               antioxidant and anti-inflammatory protection as a bonus.
               Flaxseeds are 20 to 40 percent soluble prebiotic fiber from mucilage gums, which give
               you blissful bowel movements. They also kick your gut microbes into high gear. I have
               more love for flaxseeds, so we’ll come back to them later.
               Wheat bran has a special type of fiber made of arabinoxylan oligosaccharides shown to
               boost healthy gut microbes like Bifidobacteria and reduce digestive symptoms like
               flatulence and abdominal pain. It also has antioxidant and anticancer effects. One of the
               great scientists of our generation, Dr. Balfour Sartor at the University of North
               Carolina, has been touting the benefits of bran for years, even when others were
               criticizing wheat. Bran is the hard outer coating that protects the seed and is often
               removed in food processing. So if you’re choosing refined grains or are unnecessarily
               gluten-free, you won’t get to enjoy these benefits. We’ll talk more about gluten later in
               this chapter. I know you’re wondering.
               White potatoes are an excellent source of resistant starch. That’s right: white potatoes.
               French fries and potato chips are obviously bad but my Irish microbes love a good
               potato mash. They’re a great source of prebiotic resistant starch! In one study, they
               increased SCFA levels more than inulin from chicory root. Here’s a tip: If you let your
               potatoes cool, the process of cooling creates more resistant starch. If you heat and cool
               repeatedly, you just keep turning it up. Leftover mashed potatoes, anyone?
               Seaweed! Seaweed rocks fiber content that is 50 to 85 percent soluble prebiotic. It may
               explain some of the longevity seen in Japan, where it’s regularly consumed. I’ll talk
               more about seaweed in Chapter 8. It’s a great addition to a Fiber Fueled diet.




Phytochemicals: Game changers beyond fiber
Each plant offers you a unique mix of nutrients: fiber, plant protein,
carbohydrates, healthy fats, vitamins, minerals, and so on. We have talked a lot
about fiber, but the benefits of phytochemicals shouldn’t be overlooked.
“Phyto-” is a prefix meaning “plant.” Phytochemicals are exclusive nutrients that
you’ll only find in plant foods, and there are at least 8,000 of them, most of
which we know very little about. Only about 150 of them have actually been
studied. But what we keep finding, study after study, is that phytochemicals are
good for us.
   Let me give you an example. People say, “An apple a day keeps the doctor
away.” Could this old adage possibly be true? Recent studies emphatically say,
“Yes!” No surprise, apples are a great source of fiber. A medium-size apple has
4.4 grams of fiber, about two-thirds insoluble and one-third soluble fiber. That’s
just the beginning. Apples also contain numerous phytochemicals. Quercetin-3-
galactoside,     quercetin-3-glucoside,    quercetin-3-rhamnoside,       catechin,
epicatechin, procyanidin, cyanidin-3-galactoside, coumaric acid, chlorogenic
acid, gallic acid, and phloridzin—to name just a few. Each part of the apple has a
different mix of phytochemicals, depending on whether you’re looking at the
peel, the pulp, or even the core.
   Each of these phytochemicals has unique healing properties. For example,
quercetin protects against lung and colon cancer, coronary artery disease, type 2
diabetes, asthma, and liver damage. Catechins protect against lung cancer,
coronary artery disease, stroke, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
   And did you know apples have probiotics? Put down the capsule and pick up
an apple because a single apple may contain as many as one hundred million
bacteria. Plants have a microbiome, too! Just like in humans, the microbes
contribute greatly to the health and development of the apple from flower to
fruit. The apple has tremendous diversity, with literally thousands of species. In
fact, organically produced apples have not only more microbial diversity, but
they also have a shift toward higher levels of microbes known to have a benefit
on human health, such as the probiotic Lactobacilli. Scientists now believe that
this exchange between the plant microbiome and the human gut microbiome
may be of special importance for human health and a crucial source of microbes
for our gut. It is yet another example of how we’re all a part of the circle of life,
and everything in our universe is interconnected.
   Not every apple is the same. We now see that each varietal has its own unique
mix of health-promoting stuff. But in all cases the fiber, phytochemicals, and
microbes contribute in some way to human health. This explains why apples
have been found to reduce the risk of developing cancer, heart disease, asthma,
and type 2 diabetes.
   So should we all gorge ourselves on a bushel of apples daily? Absolutely not.
This is just a window into the magic of fruits and vegetables. Apples are one
fruit, and I share this case study with you to show you some of the amazing
qualities you’ll find in apples. But every single fruit, vegetable, whole grain,
legume, seed, and nut has its own unique blend of fiber, phytochemicals, and
microbes worthy of a celebration.
   Many of the colors that you see in plants are the result of their
phytochemicals. So when you hear people saying, “Eat the rainbow,” this is the
reason why. It’s top secret code for “Diversity of Plants.”

     BENEFITS OF EATING THE RAINBOW
     COLOR        PLANT                 PHYTOCHEMICALS           BENEFITS
     Red          Tomatoes,             Lycopene                 Provides antioxidants;
                  watermelon                                     protects against
                                                                 prostate cancer
     Orange      Carrots, sweet       Beta-carotene           Supports healthy skin,
                 potatoes,                                    immune system, and
                 pumpkins                                     eyes
     Yellow-     Oranges, lemons,     Limonoids, flavonoids   Protects against cancer
     orange      peaches                                      and heart disease
     Green       Spinach, kale,       Chlorophyll, lutein     Protects against
                 collards                                     cancer; protects
                                                              healthy eyes
     Green-      Broccoli, Brussels   Indoles,                Very strong cancer
     white       sprouts, cabbage,    isothiocyanates         protection
                 cauliflower
     White-      Garlic, onions,      Allyl sulfides          Lowers cholesterol and
     green       chives, asparagus                            blood pressure,
                                                              reduces risk of
                                                              stomach cancer and
                                                              heart disease
     Blue        Blueberries,         Anthocyanins            Provides antioxidants,
                 blackberries                                 improves memory,
                                                              protects against cancer
     Purple      Purple grapes,       Resveratrol             Lowers cholesterol,
                 plums                                        protects against clots
     Brown       Whole grains,        Fiber!                  Read Chapter 3!
                 legumes

  It gets better. Two different plants can create a synergistic effect—it’s like
nature’s version of a match made in heaven. For example:


               Tomatoes and avocadoes in guacamole: Tomatoes are rich in
               lycopene, which reduces cancer risk and cardiovascular disease.
               Healthy fats from avocadoes make the lycopene more
               bioavailable. Yay healthy fats!
               A mixed fruit bowl: A study out of Cornell University
               discovered that combinations of fruit resulted in greater
               antioxidant activity that was additive and synergistic. Based upon
               this, the authors recommended “that to improve their nutrition
               and health, consumers should be getting antioxidants from a
               diverse diet.”
               Kale and lemon: Kale is a plant-based source of iron, which is
               non-heme and less bioavailable. Heme iron comes from animal
               products, is more bioavailable, but also more inflammatory and
               has been associated with coronary artery disease, colon cancer,
               and type 2 diabetes. The vitamin C from a lemon cranks up iron
                absorption and allows you to get what you need from a non–heart
                disease/colon cancer/diabetes-inducing source, meaning a plant.
                Turmeric and black pepper: The active ingredient in turmeric is
                curcumin, a potent anti-inflammatory that actually works great
                for people with joint pains. By sprinkling black pepper on your
                curry, you increase the bioavailability of curcumin by 2,000
                percent.


   Picture sitting down at every meal and eating food that you absolutely love.
Your plate is full of color—bright greens and reds, soothing blues and purple,
sunny yellow and orange. All the flavors are there—sweet, salty, bitter, sour, and
umami (savory). The smells are simply divine, conjuring up memories of the
best homemade meal you ever had, making your belly feel warm and your
mouth start to water. There are tons of variation in texture, with crunch balanced
against soft and chewy. And when you’re done eating, you feel fantastic. No
food hangover that requires a bolus of caffeine to compensate for it. You feel
energized and light—your very best self. How liberating would it be for you to
enjoy a meal like that without worrying about compliance with complex rules or
food lists, to be driven instead by color and taste and texture.
   This is the life I envision for you. It’s vibrantly colorful. It’s fun and fresh. It’s
effortlessly healthy. Plant-based diversity is the antithesis of categorical food
restriction. There’s been a trend toward deeper and deeper food restrictions out
there, but it’s not working because the true solution is radical abundance, not
extreme deprivation. With that in mind, I want to walk you through the science
behind some of the targets of dietary restriction and show you that we’re better
with these foods back in our lives.



The power of whole grains
Many of us have been led to believe that whole grains are inflammatory and that
they are an unhealthy product of modern agriculture; this belief makes me
cringe. We really shouldn’t be lumping whole grains in with refined grains, like
sugar. They’re totally different. Whole grains are an excellent source of prebiotic
fiber and definitely belong in a diet that’s rich in plant-based diversity. If you’re
skeptical, allow me to share some of the research.
   In a systematic review and meta-analysis of forty-five studies, increasing your
daily whole-grain consumption by just two pieces of whole-grain bread
rewarded the participants with a reduced risk of coronary heart disease,
cardiovascular disease, and total cancer as well as a lower likelihood of death
from all causes, respiratory diseases, infectious diseases, diabetes, and all non-
cardiovascular, non-cancer causes. Convinced yet?
   I’ll give you more: In a meta-analysis of the Nurses’ Health Study and the
Health Professionals Follow-Up Study they found that every daily serving of
whole grains reduces your risk of death by 5 percent and your risk of death by
cardiovascular cause by 9 percent.


               In another meta-analysis including nearly 250,000 people, those
               eating the most whole grains had a 14 percent lower risk of stroke
               than those eating the fewest.
               A 2011 meta-analysis of prospective studies found that there was
               a 20 percent reduction in the risk of colorectal cancer for every
               three servings of whole grains consumed per day, and the risk
               was even lower with higher intakes.
               Another meta-analysis, this time with fifteen studies and almost
               120,000 people, found that eating three servings of whole grains
               daily was linked to lower body mass index and less belly fat.
               A systematic review and meta-analysis of sixteen cohort studies
               found that eating at least three servings of whole grains per day
               could lower your risk of diabetes by a third! There was no such
               benefit from eating refined grains, by the way. In fact, whole-
               grain bread, whole-grain cereals, wheat bran, and brown rice were
               all found to be protective on sub-analysis, while white rice
               actually increased risk.


   I can’t write a gut health book without showing you what happens to your
microbes when you consume whole grains. In a randomized controlled trial,
study subjects who substituted whole grains for refined grains saw growth of
SCFA-producing bacteria Lachnospira, increased SCFA levels, and a decrease
in pro-inflammatory Enterobacteriaceae. They also noted improvement in the
immune system and no effect on gut inflammation. In other words, whole grains
were good for the gut. You may recall from Chapter 2 that the long-term
adherence to a Paleolithic diet made the gut microbiota less healthy, with more
TMAO and fewer SCFAs, which the authors attributed to the elimination of
whole grains from the diet.
   How about inflammation? Do whole grains cause inflammation? In a
randomized controlled crossover study, those consuming whole grains saw their
measure of inflammation, the C-reactive protein, drop by 21 percent while those
who eliminated whole grains saw theirs increase by 12 percent. In a ten-year
study of dietary patterns, whole-grain consumption had the strongest anti-
inflammatory effect of the thirty-seven food groups studied. The evidence is
clear: Whole grains are anti-inflammatory.
   When we discuss carbohydrates, let’s separate destructive, refined grains from
the health-promoting whole grains. Whole grains are a great source of the fiber
that we read about in Chapter 3, empowering our microbes, and releasing SCFAs
that protect us against obesity, heart disease, stroke, and type 2 diabetes. Whole
grains aren’t inflammatory; they’re quite the opposite. If you want to villainize
“carbs,” do it to the refined grains and leave the microbiota-supporting, health-
producing whole grains alone!


But what about gluten?
There has been so much talk about gluten in recent years, so let’s get into it.
Gluten is a protein found in three specific whole grains: wheat, barley, and rye.
And, of course, it’s in any products that include wheat, barley, and rye. Since
most of us have never even seen raw wheat, it’s fair to acknowledge that almost
all gluten-containing foods are processed foods—bread, pasta, pizza, and cereal.
And that, my friends, is one of the main reasons that people may feel better
when they go gluten-free. The elimination of ultra-processed foods, including
refined carbs, is something that I support 100 percent. But does it make sense to
categorically eliminate all gluten-containing products, or are we throwing the
baby out with the bathwater?
   Gluten is a problem for people with celiac disease. They need to be
completely gluten-free and there’s no debate. But there’s the perception by some
that gluten is inflammatory, causes leaky gut and autoimmune disease, and that
we should all be gluten-free. It’s a growing trend that started with a bunch of
test-tube studies and has snowballed to this place where a third of Americans are
actively restricting gluten intake. If these test-tube studies are correct and gluten
really does cause leaky gut, then we should see improvements in gut health with
a gluten-free diet, right?
   But we don’t. We actually see the opposite. After healthy subjects without
celiac spent a month on a gluten-free diet, counts of healthy bacteria like F.
prausnitzii, Lactobacillus, and Bifidobacterium declined while evildoers E. coli
and Enterobacteriaceae increased.
   In a randomized, controlled crossover study, a “low gluten” diet reduced
healthy Bifidobacterium and butyrate-producing Anaerostipes hadrus and
Eubacterium hallii. I know you’re still wondering whether gluten causes
inflammation, affects the immune system, even causes increased intestinal
permeability. When researchers tested humans, they couldn’t find any evidence
of inflammation, immune activation, or increased intestinal permeability
connected to the consumption of gluten in this study. But there was a difference
in immune reactivity in a test tube. As I’ve mentioned before, laboratory tests
don’t always translate to human studies.
   In another study, whole wheat increased healthy Bifidobacterium and
produced metabolites that improved intestinal integrity and reduced intestinal
permeability. Let me say that again—whole wheat improved intestinal integrity
and reduced intestinal permeability (or leaky gut).
   What we’re seeing here is the difference between laboratory and human
research. In the lab, you may extract the molecule of interest then study it in
isolation, often in a concentrated form in a test tube. Clearly, this is quite
different from when a human being actually eats a gluten-containing food in real
life. For me, I take those laboratory studies with a major grain of salt and have
more trust in the human studies that show us what happens in a natural setting.
As you’ve seen, when healthy people eat wheat or other gluten-containing foods,
we find that their gut actually appears more healthy. We’ve also seen that a
gluten-free or restricted diet appears to diminish the SCFA-producing microbes
and to enhance the inflammatory ones.
   There’s more fallout from going gluten-free. A “low-gluten” diet causes loss
of the genes for carbohydrate metabolism. Back in Chapter 3 we mentioned that
we humans only have seventeen glycoside hydrolases, our digestive enzymes for
complex carbohydrates. Meanwhile, our gut microbes may have sixty thousand
or more of these enzymes. By depriving ourselves of gluten, we actually lose
part of that carbohydrate-processing mechanism. So now the gut is weaker and
less adapted to processing and unpacking complex carbs; as a result, when you
try to reintroduce complex carbs in the future, you struggle. Hello, food
sensitivity!
   And last but not least, when we eliminate gluten from our diet, the big
question is what do we replace it with? We’ve already discussed the importance
of whole grains, and gluten-containing foods are the principal source of whole
grains in the American diet. In a prospective cohort study of 6,500 people over
2,273,931 person-years, they found that as people consumed more gluten, their
risk of ischemic heart disease decreased, which they attributed to the whole
grains in gluten-containing foods. In other words, if you cut gluten out, you are
increasing your risk of ischemic heart disease, our number one killer. It’s worth
noting that this is the complete opposite of people who have celiac disease,
where the consumption of gluten sets off an inflammatory cascade that may
increase their risk of heart disease.
   I’ll admit, gluten is not a simple topic. That’s why you need someone like me,
who is qualified and has thoroughly reviewed the science, to give you insights
on the right choice for you. In Chapter 5 I will walk you through my gluten
protocol to determine whether or not you should continue to consume gluten.
Here’s a preview: Most of you should! But by no means am I advocating that
you make gluten the centerpiece of your diet. I am advocating, however, for
plant-based diversity, and to not exclude health-promoting foods from your diet
because when you narrow the spectrum of plants in your diet, you also narrow
the diversity of your microbiome. And this is true even with wheat.



Legumes: Small in stature, huge on gut-healing fiber!
The average American eats just 6.3 pounds of beans per year. That’s down by 20
percent compared to fifty years ago. And yet some argue that legumes are the
cause of every modern epidemic, which couldn’t be further from the truth.
Legumes are jam-packed with fiber. A cup of green peas, for example, has 7
grams of fiber. A cup of lentils? A whopping 16 grams. Pinto beans have 30
grams of fiber per cup.
   It’s true that the flip side of all that fiber is that consuming an excessive
amount of beans can be hard to tolerate for some. But the benefits of legumes
can’t be argued. Excess weight melts away when you eat a diet high in legumes.
Your waist gets smaller. Your blood pressure and cholesterol drop to the point of
tapering your drug. Your blood sugar balances and the diabetes disappears. And
your risk for having a heart attack or developing colon cancer just got chopped
in half.
   There are literally hundreds of studies to support beans. Let me share just one
example. In a randomized, controlled trial of a legume-packed diet versus
legume-free, the researchers held the number of calories constant so that it was
about nutrients and not calories. What they saw in the legume group was
shocking. The C-reactive protein, a marker of inflammation, dropped by 40
percent. Blood pressure and cholesterol both dropped. But what was most
fascinating is that the legume group lost more weight even though they ate the
same number of calories. You may recall from Chapter 1 when we discussed that
your gut microbiome plays a huge role in weight control, and that it’s more than
just calories in–calories out.


     Should you be eating soy?
          There’s been some debate about soy due to the perception of its carrying estrogen, but I want
          you to understand that phytoestrogens aren’t estrogen, nor do they act like human estrogen.
          Instead, phytoestrogens are isoflavones, one of the unique phytochemicals in soy beans. There
          are actually three soy isoflavones: genistein, daidzein, and glycitein. They have a number of
          health benefits, including: lowering cholesterol, strengthening bones, treating menopausal
          symptoms, lowering risk of coronary heart disease, and reducing risk of
          prostate/colon/breast/ovarian cancers.
              Want even more good news about soy? There are certain gut bacteria that can convert soy
          isoflavones into an even more beneficial compound called equol. This is like a supercharged
          isoflavone, giving you even more cardiovascular, bone, and menopausal health benefits.
          Unfortunately, you need to have the bacteria in order to do this. Equol can be produced by 50
          to 60 percent of Asian people but just 30 percent of Westerners. For what it’s worth, diets high
          in carbohydrates (really meaning fiber) and low in saturated fat are associated with equol
          production, while antibiotics appear to hinder it.
              I recommend consuming only non-GMO and organic soy in its whole-foods forms:
          edamame, tofu, miso, tempeh, tamari, and unsweetened soy milk. Model your soy
          consumption after the way they do it in Asia. For some delicious ways to consume soy, check
          out the recipes in Chapter 10.



   So how about the effect of legumes on the gut microbiota? In a mouse model,
both navy beans and black beans increased numbers of beneficial SCFA-
producing bacteria with coinciding increased SCFA production, promoted
colonic barrier integrity, and reduced bacterial endotoxin levels.
   In a randomized crossover study, chickpea consumption for three weeks in
addition to their regular diet led to increased growth of SCFA-producing bacteria
(Faecalibacterium prausnitzii) and decreased growth of the pathogenic and
putrefactive bacteria (Clostridium histolyticum and C. lituseburense). The
authors concluded that chickpeas “have the potential to modulate the intestinal
microbial composition to promote intestinal health in humans.”
   Pea protein has been shown to stimulate the growth of the health-promoting
bacteria Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria. There was a corresponding shift in the
bacterial metabolites with increased levels of the short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs). The authors concluded, “Such changes in microbial composition may
beneficially impact the intestinal environment and exert a health-promoting
effect in humans.”
   Fascinating, right? So when you take all of this together it comes as no
surprise that in a major study of food-intake patterns from around the world
there was one—and only one—food shown to make people live longer . . .
LEGUMES!


    What about lectins?
         What are lectins? Well, lectins aren’t just one thing; they’re actually a large family of protein
         compounds found in nature that are known because they bind carbohydrates. They’re
         ubiquitous in nature—humans, animals, plants, fungi, and microorganisms all have them.
         You’ll find varying amount of lectins in different foods. Some foods that contain higher
         amounts of lectins include cow’s milk, eggs, beans, peanuts, lentils, tomatoes, potatoes,
         eggplant, fruits, wheat, and other grains.
             In recent years there’s been a growing perception that lectins are inflammatory;
         specifically, that they damage the lining of your gut and over-activate your immune system—
         and as a result, the thinking goes, lectins may be contributing to our twenty-first-century
         epidemics. According to this line of argument, the way to counter this is to reduce or eliminate
         all grains (including pseudo-grains), beans and legumes, nuts, fruits, and many vegetables—
         massive, in some cases categorical, elimination. But is it justified?
             The idea that lectins may cause disease isn’t very novel. It has floated around in fringe
         medical literature for decades based on test-tube and animal-model studies mostly from the
         1970s and 1980s. If you only present those studies, lectins can sound very scary.
             But there’s a reason that well-respected journals and the world’s leading doctors and
         nutritionists aren’t cringing in fear from lectins or shying away from beans and grains. First,
         there’s the other side of the story, which is that lectins from wheat, fava beans, soybeans,
         mushrooms, bananas, buckwheat, and jackfruit have all been implicated as protective against
         cancer. But more important, experts know that test-tube and animal studies often don’t
         translate well into real life. Similar to our studies on gluten, we need to confirm the findings in
         human populations. Otherwise we run the risk of finding some pretty quacky things that
         mislead us and in some cases can harm us.
             So what do we find when we study legumes and whole grains in human populations? Well,
         you already know. Weight loss. Lower blood pressure and lower cholesterol. Reversal of
         insulin resistance. Less inflammation. A shift in the microbiome to produce more SCFAs.
         Protection from cardiovascular disease and cancer. Longer life expectancy. Study after study
         has shown us that legumes and whole grains are absolutely vital to your health and your gut’s
         health. They’re a powerful source of fiber and their unique qualities make them irreplaceable
         if you eliminate them. Remember: What’s the single greatest predictor of a healthy gut
         microbiome? The diversity of plants in your diet.



  Let’s talk about legumes and grains together for a minute. Did you know that
when you combine beans with a whole grain, you create a complete protein
package, ramp up the fiber, and get your protein from a low-calorie, high-
nutrient plant source? Remember, the source of our protein matters, and when
you replace animal protein with plant sources you find that people are healthier
and live longer. Consider that Costa Rica outperforms the United States in life
expectancy on a diet centered around beans and rice while spending a mere
fraction on health care. They’re not the only ones! Legumes and whole grains
are celebrated in the diets of all five Blue Zones. These are longevity foods, and
they are the foundation of gut health.



It all comes back to the Golden Rule—Diversity of Plants!
Would you agree that a healthy diet is one that maximizes nutrients in terms of
achieving optimal amounts for bodily function? This is the concept of “nutrient
density,” meaning that we want as many nutrients as possible per calorie that we
consume. But nutrient density alone just isn’t enough to describe an ideal diet.
What if you ate kale, and kale only, all day long, and nothing else. Would you be
healthy?
   Absolutely not. Kale is a superfood, but if it’s the only thing you ate you’d be
redundantly and excessively loading up on the nutrients that kale provides but
missing out on the nutrients, fiber variety, and microbes you’d get from other
plants. For example, if you consumed 2,000 calories of kale per day you’d get 30
times more copper, 80 times more vitamin A, 80 times more vitamin C, and 360
times more vitamin K than you actually need. Hopefully you just urinate it out,
but there comes a point for anything in life where too much of a good thing can
actually be harmful. Meanwhile you’d be sorely missing the lycopene that you
find in tomatoes, the selenium you find in Brazil nuts, and the vitamin B5 from
avocados. Eventually those nutrient deficiencies set in. You’d get nearly 150
grams of fiber per day, but it would all be of the same type. No diversity of
plants to provide diversity of fiber to a diversity of microbes. You would miss
out on all the other species you’d find in the microbiota of other plant foods.
   We have a tendency in our culture to obsess over superfoods. Like the
celebrities of food, we put them on a pedestal and celebrate their elite nutrient
density and special properties. I’m going to give you some of my favorites in
Chapter 8, and they’re foods that are dear to my heart. But if you ate only the
foods in Chapter 8, your diet wouldn’t be as healthy as the person who’s just
really good at maximizing plant-based diversity in their diet. In my program, I
focus on maximizing plant-based diversity first, and then incorporate
superfoods.
   To recap:


     Every time you go to the supermarket: Think Diversity of Plants!
     Every time you’re cooking a meal: Diversity of Plants!
      When you sit down at the dinner table and start loading up your plate:
      Diversity of Plants!


   As a medical doctor, I know when someone is actively dying, even if they’re
still alive. You see how one organ affects the other. When one fails, it drags
down another, setting off a chain reaction that leads to multi-organ failure and
ultimate demise. What if we could do the opposite of this, and simultaneously
lift all organs up at once? With a plant-centered diet, you’re not just fixing one
problem, you are fixing all of them and optimizing the health of your organs in
the process. Not just treating disease, not just avoiding disease, but actually
optimizing your body and making it better. Becoming your best self.
   Eating a diet fully enriched with all the colors, flavors, and nutrients nature
has to offer is all you need. Remember the Golden Rule that will never change:


      Diversity of Plants, Diversity of Plants, Diversity of Plants.




To view the 45+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                                 5
Finding Your Plant Passion with a Sensitive
Gut
  Your custom plan to ease bloating, gas, cramps, and altered bowels




I suspect that many of you are thinking right now, How am I going to do this? I
feel horrible when I eat those foods. What if my body hates fiber? Statistically
that’s 15 to 20 percent of people, but since you’re reading this book, there’s a
decent chance you have irritable bowel. Fifty to 80 percent of people with IBS
have food sensitivities. But you are the person who needs this book the most.
That’s the great irony. The people who need fiber the most are the ones who will
also struggle the most to eat it. You have to fix the gut to reap the reward of
better health. And to fix the gut, we know we need fiber and diversity of plants.
   So what does it say that you struggle to process fiber or certain types of
plants? Well, it indicates that your gut has been damaged. Of course people with
digestive disorders are going to struggle more with these foods. But it’s not just
them. This may also be true for people with allergic and immune system
disorders. Or migraines, anxiety, or depression, or, frankly, any of the litany of
conditions that we learned is associated with dysbiosis in Chapter 1. Where
there’s dysbiosis you’ll also find food sensitivities. If that’s you, then I want to
help you the most because then we are correcting the root cause of your problem
and helping you enjoy your food again.
   That doesn’t mean it’s going to be easy. You’ve been searching for solutions
to your problem and the solution that’s been offered to you for the last fifteen
years has been, “Well just get rid of it.” And when you do this, you may feel
better in the short term. But are you better in the long term? Generally not.
Elimination, particularly categorical elimination, is short-term gain and long-
term pain.
   It’s clear that the Golden Rule is in direct conflict with the idea of eliminating
entire plant categories. We learned in Chapter 4 that when you eliminate plant
categories you deprive yourself of the health benefits and alter the balance of
bacteria in your gut to favor dysbiosis.
   So why do people do it? Why do people eliminate beans, grains, and
nightshades?
   Part of the reason is that many of these foods bring out the worst in their gut—
gas, bloating, cramping pain, and weird noises. I’m sure you’ve seen the photos
on the internet that show a protuberant, pregnancy-like belly and a flat belly
from the exact same day. I can’t tell you how many patients have brought these
photos to my office as evidence of a problem. They’re not as helpful as the poop
selfies, but I understand that you want to show that something is wrong.
   The thing is that these symptoms of digestive distress have been,
unfortunately, misinterpreted. I see a lot of people on the Internet, even some
medical doctors, claiming that bloating and gas brought on by plant foods means
that they’re inflammatory. But as we discussed in Chapter 4, these foods have
repeatedly proven to be the opposite—anti-inflammatory. I’ve also taken care of
plenty of patients who think that because they have these symptoms it means
they’re incapable of eating these foods, and therefore it makes sense to
acknowledge the problem, eliminate the triggers, and move on.
   But think of it this way: If you have arthritis in your knee, does that mean you
should buy a motorized scooter and stop walking? Sure, if you quit walking,
you’ll never feel that discomfort in your knee again, right? But then your
exercise falls off, your legs atrophy, you gain weight, then end up on multiple
medications to control your blood pressure/cholesterol/diabetes, and you feel
depressed and weak. But hey, your knee doesn’t hurt! Is that worth it?
   If, instead, you put in the effort and decide, I’m going to walk, do some
physical therapy, exercise my leg and knee, then you’ll actually be able to lessen
the pain and at the same time maintain health throughout your body. For the
person with arthritis, it’s painful in the beginning to start healing through
exercise and therapy. But weathering that initial discomfort, the reward is a
stronger knee, increased functional capacity, and better health that extends
beyond the knee. The same is true with food sensitivities—if you accept that
while it may not be easy in the short term, it’s so much better in the long term,
we can work through the short-term effects together. The point is that there will
be unintended consequences when we allow unhealthy lifestyle habits to form.
But there’s also the flip side, which are the unintended benefits that come when
we choose health and opt for plant-based diversity.
   In the coming pages I’ll break down the science behind why people develop
food sensitivities and lay out our plan to address them. If you take it slow and
take your time adding in plant-based foods, you’ll reach the long-term reward
for short-term discomfort: a stronger gut, broader plant-based diversity, and
better health that extends beyond the belly.


     Share the Message
          There are so many other people who need to hear the message of plant-based diversity for gut
          health. I mean, I wish I could go back to the younger version of myself and slap this book
          across my head. Softcover version, of course. I wouldn’t have wasted all those years feeling
          miserable. So what I’m saying is that you, too, can be a transformative power for positive
          change. This book is nothing if it sits on the shelf. NOTHING. But this is something really
          powerful in the hands of a reader, and if you’ve felt that power, share it with others. Discuss it,
          recommend it, share your copy, gift it, send them to the library, post your favorite piece of
          knowledge to social media. We all can do our part to promote consciousness in our food
          choices and help people heal. Just think of what you’ve accomplished by getting one person to
          read this book and transform their health! We can all be instruments of change for a better
          world.




Why do we get food sensitivities? Why not with meat?
It’s your gut microbiota! When you curse the heavens as you watch your friend
scarf down unlimited quantities of that six-bean chili while you try to maintain a
straight face and not show the discomfort you’re experiencing, just know . . . it’s
not you. It’s your bugs. Yes, you are 99.9 percent genetically the same as that
person sitting across from you. But your gut microbiome is a totally different
story, completely uniquely yours. It’s just as personal as your fingerprint. There
is literally no one on the planet with a gut microbiome exactly like yours. If you
had an identical twin, you’d most closely resemble your twin followed by your
mother, yet still be entirely distinct.
   Your unique gut microbiome has strengths and weaknesses that are uniquely
yours. It may be really good at processing beans but really struggle with garlic
and onions. In a perfect world, if your diet perfectly complemented the strengths
and weaknesses of your gut, then you wouldn’t have any food sensitivity at all.
None.
   Since your diet and your microbiome are completely intertwined, your diet
needs to be just as personal to you as your microbiome is. You need to use some
trial and error to discover your custom, ideal diet. Now it may seem
contradictory to say “There’s no one size fits all” immediately after defining
“one Golden Rule for better health.” But it’s rather simple: You follow the
Golden Rule of maximizing diversity of plants with every meal, but recognize
that how that looks for you is going to be different from the person sitting next to
you who is eating from the same selection of foods.
   The goal is to hit that sweet spot where your dietary choices are perfectly
matched to the strengths and weaknesses of your gut, and then magic ensues. No
digestive distress, maximum plants, healing gut and body. We’re going to help
you identify some of the strengths and weaknesses in your gut so that we can get
started fine-tuning, not by eliminating foods but by going slow. We’re going to
get you to that sweet spot.
   The important thing to remember is that it’s not about perfection. And yes,
there will be times when you’ll have gas, bloating, discomfort, or altered bowels.
We all have that from time to time, myself included. But what we are going to
do is optimize your gut and, in doing so, make those symptoms infrequent to the
point that they no longer command your attention or affect your quality of life.
   The way we accomplish this is by treating your gut like a muscle. Every time
you sit down to eat it’s like your gut is going to the gym. Physical fitness is
defined by health and well-being achieved through nutrition, exercise, and
sufficient rest to optimize performance in some way, whether it’s sports or just
activities of daily living. If our gut is a muscle, gut fitness means digestive health
fueled by fiber and achieved by training your gut through plant-based diversity.
   In the gym, if you always work out your biceps but never work out your
triceps, you’re going to have some unbalanced, funny-looking arms. If you don’t
work out a muscle group, it atrophies. If you don’t use it, you lose it, right?
Same rules apply to the gut. If you eliminate a food group, your ability to
consume that food dwindles.
   What if you’ve been out of commission for a few months due to an injury? If
you go to the gym and try to lift three hundred pounds on your first day, you’re
going to hurt yourself. In the same regard, if you haven’t been eating beans and
you scarf down a big bowl of the six-bean chili, you’re going to feel it because
your body isn’t adapted or trained for what you’re doing.
   So what’s the best approach in the gym? Work out every single muscle group,
just enough to promote growth without injury, and often enough to keep them all
maintained or growing. This is exactly the way we should handle our food. We
need to work out our gut with every plant category, just enough without
overdoing it, and often enough to build our tolerance. Think of every single plant
variety as working out a different muscle group. By emphasizing diversity of
plants, you are giving your gut the dynamic workout that it’s craving. So all
plant groups need to be on the menu from time to time, not necessarily daily but
often enough to maintain our gut fitness.
   We all know the building block of muscle. It’s the thing we’re getting too
much of yet still worry it’s not enough—protein. But if we’re treating the gut
like a muscle, we should recognize the building block of that muscle—fiber.
You can’t build a healthy gut without fiber.
   And here’s what’s cool: Just like with exercise, your gut will get stronger and
become better adapted to what you’re trying to do. That’s a big takeaway from
this book. Your gut is adaptable, and it will adjust to your choices.
   Consider this example: Remember in Chapter 2 when we discussed the
modern-day hunter-gatherer Hadza tribe of Tanzania? They consume more than
100 grams of fiber per day, about six hundred varieties of plants per year, and
have 40 percent more gut diversity than the average American. It turns out that
there’s a seasonal variation to how they eat that causes a seasonal change in their
microbiota. In the wet season, which lasts from November to April, they’re more
likely to forage for berries. During the dry season from May to October, they
hunt animals. Meanwhile, year-round they consume tubers and a variety of
plants to get 100 grams of fiber or more per day.
   When researchers studied the microbiome of the Hazda, they saw that many
species of bacteria disappear for a season and then reappear. And the functional
ability of their microbiome alters as a result. Researchers found that foods eaten
more regularly resulted in enrichment of the enzymes necessary to digest them.
In the wet season when the Hadza consume more berries, they noticed
enrichment of the enzymes needed to process a specific component of the berries
called fructans. Sear that last sentence into your brain because we’re going to
come back to it in a moment.
   Here’s another example: Consider lactose, a short-chain carbohydrate (or
sugar) found in dairy products. When I use the term “sugar” here, I don’t mean
table sugar or glucose, but rather I’m referring to a simple carbohydrate, as
opposed to fiber or starch. In order for lactose to be processed we need the
enzyme lactase. But 75 percent of the world’s population are deficient in this
enzyme, and therefore lactose intolerant. So three in four people have the
potential for gas, bloating, digestive distress, and altered bowel habits if they
consume dairy.
   But can people make themselves less lactose intolerant? Is it possible to train
the gut to handle lactose?
   First of all, there is an amount of lactose that can be tolerated in these cases. If
I take a medicine dropper and put two drops of cow’s milk on someone’s tongue,
they’re not going to have blow-out explosive diarrhea from that. No one is that
lactose intolerant. So there’s a threshold that needs to be crossed to trigger the
symptoms.
   Second, the gut adapts to regular exposure to lactose. For example, regular
consumption of lactose over the course of ten days led to adaptation of colonic
bacteria with more lactase activity, less digestive distress, and objectively far
less production of gas. In another study, ten days of regular lactose consumption
led to improved efficiency of lactose digestion and reduced gas production by
threefold.
   What does this all mean? First, there is a threshold of tolerance that exists and
if we cross that threshold we get symptoms but if we stay within the bounds we
should be feeling pretty good. Second, your gut adapts to what you give it. In
other words, your gut can be trained to tolerate foods that you’re sensitive to.
Third, your gut needs to be fed in order to be trained. In other words, elimination
diets will only heighten food sensitivities.


     Got Milk?
          For the record, you shouldn’t. I am not advocating for training your gut to handle lactose. We
          learned about the effect of animal protein and saturated fat on the gut in Chapter 2—less
          SCFA-producing bacteria, more inflammatory bacteria, increased TMAO production,
          increased intestinal permeability, and increases in bacterial endotoxin. As we’ve done in the
          past, when we examine the whole food rather than a sum of its parts, we find that dairy
          products have been associated with prostate cancer and Parkinson’s disease. Also the link to
          bone health turns out to be a myth—a prospective study of ninety-six thousand people over
          twenty-two years showed that milk consumption during teenage years did not protect against
          hip fracture later in life. In fact, men who drank more milk as a teenager actually had increased
          risk of hip fracture in the study. In a study of women in Sweden, high milk intake was
          associated with increased risk of bone fracture, heart disease, cancer, and premature death.
          One of the first things I do with my patients who have gas, bloating, or diarrhea is to eliminate
          dairy. You would not believe how many of them are cured just by doing this. Sorry, but milk
          doesn’t do a body good. The irony is that lactose, which has been vilified through the years as
          evil, is probably the most redeeming thing about dairy because lactose is actually a prebiotic
          and can have a beneficial effect on the gut microbiota.



   Let’s take a step back for a moment. Remember in Chapter 3 when we
discussed that we humans only have seventeen of the carbohydrate-processing
enzymes called glycoside hydrolases? Meanwhile, our gut bacteria have been
estimated to have as many as sixty thousand of these digestive enzymes! What
this means is we’ve outsourced carbohydrate processing. Why? Because it
makes us adaptable to a variable diet and environment.
   It also means that carbohydrate processing—including fiber—requires a
healthy, properly adapted gut microbiome. When we damage the gut and reduce
diversity, we also reduce the number and types of digestive enzymes in our gut.
And that is the reason why there are so many people struggling to deal with
carbs these days. We’re not eating enough of them to train our gut, and then
we’re damaging our gut with the other aspects of our lifestyle—processed food,
meat and dairy, antibiotics, medications, hypersterility, and sedentarism.
   The irony is that we need complex carbohydrates in our diet . . . terribly.
They’re our prebiotic foods. That’s how we Fiber Fuel our body and reap the
healing benefits of SCFAs. So there is this vicious cycle where complex carbs
cause digestive distress, which motivates us to reduce our intake or, worse yet,
eliminate them, which weakens the microbiome and makes it less capable of
processing carbs so that next time you try them your digestive distress is even
worse. So then we label all carbs as being inflammatory and bad for us when in
fact they’re actually the solution. It’s a common mistake that’s been prescribed
by numerous fad diets, and at best it’s short-term gain with long-term loss.


    A closer look at inflammatory foods in the gut
         Studies keep showing that the complex carbohydrates you’ll find in whole fruits, veggies,
         legumes, and whole grains are anything but inflammatory. They’re actually anti-inflammatory.
         But we rely on our gut microbiome to process them, and if there’s damage to the gut then it’s
         also impaired in carbohydrate processing, which leads to digestive distress. That’s not
         inflammation, that’s just sloppy processing. It doesn’t hurt you beyond the acute symptoms.
         But what does hurt you is the effect that you see from animal product consumption—less
         SCFA-producing good bacteria, more inflammatory bacteria, increased intestinal permeability,
         release of bacterial endotoxin, creation of carcinogenic secondary bile salts/polycyclic
         aromatic hydrocarbons/N-nitroso compounds/heterocyclic aromatic amines, and vascular
         disease-fueling TMAO. Yes, it is easier for our body to digest and process meat. We don’t rely
         on our microbiome as much for that. So you may not feel any discomfort, but keep in mind
         what’s happening inside you. Silent but deadly.



   So how do we break this vicious cycle? It starts with a carb intervention. But
let’s address the hurdles we need to clear before we can begin the program.


Constipation?
First and foremost, if you’re dealing with gas and bloating we absolutely need to
make sure there’s no constipation. This is by far the number one cause of gas
and bloating that I see in my clinic. It has its own vicious cycle—methane gas
slows gut motility, causing constipation. Then, constipation increases the amount
of gas we produce from our food. In other words, gas causes constipation, which
causes more gas. I’ve found in my practice that if my patients maintain bowel
regularity and correct the constipation, they feel so much better and the gas and
bloating issues go away. But first you have to know whether or not constipation
is present, and the truth is that it’s more common than most people realize.
   Even if you don’t feel constipated, your ears should be perking up if you have
a history of constipation, ever strain to poop, drop little nuggets or turds, or
sometimes go a day without a movement. And here’s the crazy thing . . . even if
you have diarrhea, believe it or not you may be constipated. The most severe
constipation presents with diarrhea. Basically what happens is you have a
column of impacted stool stuck somewhere in your colon, and the solid stuff
piles up behind the “log jam” but the liquid can still sneak through the cracks
and crevices to come down to the bottom and come out loose. It’s very
confusing to both the doctor and the patient because severe constipation is
manifesting with loose bowel movements. We call this overflow diarrhea, and
the treatment is actually to purge the colon to relieve the blockage. So if there’s
any change in your bowel habits or a possibility of constipation, you should ask
your primary care doctor to check an abdominal x-ray to rule out constipation or
(under the guidance of your doctor) drink a bottle of magnesium citrate to
initiate a colon purge and essentially have a fresh start.
   You absolutely will not have success on a plant-based diet if you are trying to
ramp up fiber consumption while being constipated. In my clinic, we don’t even
consider dietary changes until the constipation is corrected. I’d recommend
consulting with your primary care doctor or a gastroenterologist locally to get
the constipation under control before moving forward with a dietary overhaul.


Food sensitivity versus food allergy
The next thing we need to understand is whether you may be experiencing a
food sensitivity or a food allergy. I hear a lot of people describing their gas and
bloating as a food allergy. To me, this is more than just semantics. If you have a
specific food that you’re proven to be allergic to, then you actually do have a
medical reason to eliminate that food. Although it is technically possible to build
tolerance to a food allergy, it is a fragile, complex process that needs to be done
under physician supervision. Most will just eliminate the food. Why? Because a
food allergy is your immune system reacting when it’s stimulated by that
particular food. The most common food allergies are to milk, fish, shellfish,
eggs, nuts and peanuts, wheat, and soy. When people with an allergy eat these
foods the immune system goes on the attack, launching IgE (Immunoglobulin E)
antibodies like missiles to attack the allergen. This process releases chemicals
that cause an allergic reaction, which can include itchiness, hives, swollen lips, a
throat that closes up, trouble breathing, or even loss of consciousness. This is
very different from a food sensitivity, where you may feel bloating, gas,
diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and fatigue. It’s an important distinction
because if you really do have a food allergy, then you absolutely should
eliminate that food from your diet. But if it’s a food sensitivity, then it’s not your
immune system reacting and you should be able to train your gut to be able to
process it. If there’s any question whatsoever, you need to work with your doctor
to determine whether or not it’s a food allergy. There’s no one test that is
adequately reliable to answer this question alone, and therefore you need the
assistance of a qualified health professional.


Gluten
Let’s deal with gluten for the last time. There are three major groups of people
who should not be consuming gluten, and there are two groups who should be
consuming gluten. Everyone falls into one of these five groups. For what it’s
worth, the latter two groups make up at least 90 percent of the American
population. I’m going to describe each one and walk you through how you can
determine whether or not you meet these criteria.
  You should not consume gluten if you have:


     CELIAC DISEASE—If you have celiac disease, you need to be 100
     percent gluten-free for the rest of your life. Continued gluten consumption
     isn’t just disruptive, it’s dangerous and can lead to small bowel T-cell
     lymphoma, which is almost universally fatal. About 1 percent of Americans
     have celiac disease. Classic symptoms of celiac disease include diarrhea,
     bloating, gas, abdominal pain, and weight loss. Occasionally you’ll find it
     in someone who is constipated. I also think of celiac anytime I see someone
     with low iron levels. The intestinal damage from celiac affects the small
     intestine, where iron is typically absorbed. If you have any of these
     symptoms or are worried that you may have celiac disease, there are two
     tests for you to consider that can definitively tell you whether or not you
     have celiac:
Genetic testing for HLA-DQ2 or DQ8: In order to have celiac you
must meet three criteria—have the genes, consume gluten, and
activate the gene through dysbiosis. In other words, it’s
impossible to have celiac disease if you don’t have the gene. So
you can have your blood analyzed for the celiac genes, and if
they’re not present, you don’t have celiac. If you do have the
gene, it doesn’t necessarily mean you have or will ever have
celiac disease. In fact, there’s a 97 percent chance that you don’t
have celiac despite having the gene. But if you are genetically
positive, it means that celiac is possible and therefore additional
testing is necessary to determine whether or not it’s present.


Upper endoscopy with biopsies of the small intestine: This is the
gold standard test for determining whether or not celiac is
present. Basically, you will need to see a gastroenterologist such
as myself to be scheduled for this procedure. After you are
sedated, a doctor will run a flexible tube the size of a pinkie (a
cute pinkie! Not too big!) with a light and camera down into your
stomach and small intestine. This allows biopsies to be taken
from the small intestine—two from the first segment of the
duodenum and four from the second segment. The entire
procedure typically takes just five minutes. It’s important for you
to consume gluten in the days leading up to the procedure
because that’s the only way to tell if gluten is causing damage to
the intestine. It is these biopsies that ultimately tell the story. A
pathologist uses special criteria for evaluating for celiac disease
called the Marsh classification to determine what damage, if any,
is present. Marsh grade can be from I to IV, with IV being the
most severe. Traditionally, grade III or IV disease is classified as
celiac. But this is a spectrum, and in recent years there have been
studies showing that Grades I and II are celiac, too. The reason
I’m breaking this down for you is to tell you that blood tests for
celiac disease are usually positive for Grade III or IV disease yet
usually negative for Grade I or II. So the blood test can be
negative and be wrong! Therefore, if you suspect you have celiac,
you should skip the blood test and do either the genetic test or
move forward with upper endoscopy with biopsies. The vast
majority of celiac disease that I diagnose is Marsh I, and these
          people do incredibly well when I put them on a gluten-free diet.
          But I would have missed them if I’d just done the traditional
          blood test.


WHEAT ALLERGY: This isn’t necessarily a reaction to gluten, but it is a
reaction to proteins found in wheat. Similar to other food allergies, the
results are generally dramatic: hives, lip or throat swelling, difficulty
breathing, or anaphylaxis. GI symptoms such as diarrhea and abdominal
pain may also be present. Wheat allergy almost always develops in
childhood, and affects 0.4 percent of American kids. It is extremely rare to
develop wheat allergy as an adult unless you have occupational exposure,
so bear that in mind. If you have wheat allergy, that would also be grounds
to be completely wheat-free. Since it may not be gluten, it’s possible that
barley and rye can remain on your menu. Testing for a wheat allergy is not
quite as straightforward and decisive as it is for celiac disease, so it’s best to
address this issue with a qualified health professional. That said, if you’re
having hives, lip or throat swelling, difficulty breathing, or anaphylaxis in
relation to any food, I’d recommend you stop eating that food. Pretty
straightforward.


NON-CELIAC                GLUTEN              SENSITIVITY                WITH
EXTRAINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS: Okay, of the five categories that
I’m going to describe, this is the one that we’re working the hardest to
figure out. The challenge is that we use one diagnosis to describe a whole
bunch of different conditions, all of which are exceedingly rare. It’s
incredibly difficult to study a heterogenous group of extremely rare
conditions. They are even rarer than celiac disease. These conditions can
occur outside the intestine, may be tied back to gluten, and may improve on
a gluten-free diet. Specific symptoms I’m referring to are joint or muscle
pain, leg or arm numbness, or neurologic symptoms like altered mental
status, loss of balance or muscle control, or a rash. The classic rash is called
dermatitis herpetiformis and is characterized by an itchy, vesicular rash
symmetrically on the elbows, knees, butt, and trunk. Psoriasis can also be
associated with celiac disease. If you or your doctor suspect celiac, it’s
absolutely imperative that you have celiac testing done. For example, 85
percent of adults with dermatitis herpetiformis actually have celiac.
Similarly, antibodies to gluten are found in 85 percent of people with
gluten-related neurologic conditions, often in association with Marsh I
histology on small intestine biopsies. If you definitively test negative for
celiac disease yet wonder if gluten is causing your arthritis, leg or arm
numbness, neurologic symptoms, or rash, then it would make sense to try a
gluten-free diet for a few months to assess your response. If you improve,
you can challenge yourself by reintroducing gluten and if symptoms come
back, then you have your answer. Of course, this would be done under the
guidance of a qualified health professional.


You should consume gluten if you are:


COMPLETELY SYMPTOM FREE: Let me keep this short and sweet. If
you have absolutely no symptoms and absolutely no reason to suspect you
have celiac disease or any of these conditions, you should not be on a
gluten-free diet. As we discussed in Chapter 4, you are unintentionally
damaging your gut and increasing your risk for other conditions like
coronary artery disease. ’Nuff said!


NON-CELIAC GLUTEN SENSITIVITY WITH ONLY DIGESTIVE
SYMPTOMS: If you suffer exclusively from digestive symptoms after
ingestion of gluten-containing foods—bloating, gas, distension, abdominal
pain, diarrhea, or constipation—then you absolutely need to have testing to
rule out celiac disease. But if those tests prove decisively that you do not
have it, then we need to regroup.
   Recent research reveals that for many people, gluten may not be the real
culprit. Consider a study in which researchers gave people with “gluten
sensitivity” an oatmeal bar every day for a week. Concealed within the bar
was one of three things: a placebo (sugar), gluten, or fructans. Fructans are
short-chain carbohydrates that you’ll find in gluten-containing foods
(wheat, barley, and rye). Every person was exposed to a different bar after
taking a break for a week to let his or her system settle down. During each
week they measured the average GI symptom scores for each person.
Here’s what they found: Compared to placebo, the patients actually had
fewer GI symptoms during the week that they were eating the gluten bar.
Fewer symptoms! Let that register for a moment. Then when they ate the
fructan bar they saw a big increase in digestive symptoms relative to both
    the placebo and the gluten bar. In other words, most people who have non-
    celiac gluten sensitivity aren’t even sensitive to gluten. They’re sensitive to
    fructans. And their symptoms are being triggered because they have
    underlying dysbiosis with irritable bowel syndrome. So what are these
    fructans? We will cover them in the next section.



    How to be gluten-free and still nurture your gut
         So what’s a sensible approach to gluten consumption? Well if you absolutely need to be
         gluten-free, then I would recommend paying special attention to your whole-grain intake.
         Since wheat is the dominant form of whole grain in the United States, you need to make sure
         that you’re adequately supporting your gut microbiome. Thankfully, there are some delicious
         gluten-free whole grains available for you to routinely consume: quinoa, buckwheat, millet,
         sorghum, oats, and brown rice. Get them into your belly! On the flip side, if gluten is a part of
         your diet, which it should be for most of you, I’m not encouraging you to go eat more
         processed foods. Most gluten-containing foods are processed foods. What I encourage you to
         eat is more unprocessed or minimally processed wheat, barley, and rye. Look for whole-grain
         products, like whole-grain bread and pasta when they are called for. But remember not to
         overdo it. Moderation is just fine.




Let’s talk about FODMAPs
Just a few pages ago we were chatting about how the gut microbiome has shown
the ability to adapt to lactose exposure. We also talked about the Hadzas’
seasonal variation in diet and how when they ate more berries they trained their
microbiome to process fructans. Then we discovered that most people with GI
symptoms from gluten don’t actually have a problem with gluten, but likely have
underlying irritable bowel syndrome being triggered by—here’s that word again
—fructans. So what are we referring to here? We’re talking about FODMAPs.
Perhaps you’ve heard this term dropped in conversation. FODMAPs are simple
or short-chain carbohydrates found in our plant food. FODMAP is actually an
acronym—fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and
polyols. You need to memorize that because I’m going to test you on it later.
Just kidding—no, I’m not.
   Anyway, these FODMAPs are foods that are, by definition, fermentable.
They’re also poorly absorbed, which means that they draw water into the
intestine and can cause diarrhea. By escaping digestion, they reach the lower
intestine where the gut bacteria reside. These gut bacteria then feast on these
carbs, in the process producing hydrogen gas along with potentially other by-
products. We rely on our gut microbiota to work their magic and process these
foods for us with their glycoside hydrolase enzymes. In people who have
damage to their microbiota, such as those with irritable bowel syndrome, the loss
of digestive capacity can lead to maldigestion, gas, bloating, discomfort, and
diarrhea.
   There are five categories of FODMAPs to be aware of. As you’re reading this
section, if you suffer from food sensitivity, consider the foods within a specific
category. Do you have a sensitivity to more than one?


     Lactose—A disaccharide found in dairy products like milk, ice cream, and
     some cheeses. For aforementioned reasons, I support the elimination of
     lactose from the diet. Many of you will see improvement in digestive
     symptoms with this simple move.
     Fructose—A simple sugar found in many fruits (cherries, watermelon,
     apples), some veggies (asparagus, Jerusalem artichokes), high-fructose corn
     syrup, and honey.
     Fructans—Oligosaccharides found in a variety of foods, including gluten-
     containing grains (wheat, barley, rye) as well as fruits and veggies (garlic,
     onions).
     Galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS)—Complex sugars classically found in
     beans. Toot toot!
     Polyols—Sugar alcohols like mannitol and sorbitol, often found in artificial
     sweeteners and some fruits and veggies.


   Since FODMAPs can cause digestive symptoms, we should eliminate them,
right? Not so fast, my friend! We need to be careful about vilifying these parts of
our food when in fact they can be incredibly healthy for us. For example,
fructans and galacto-oligosaccharides are prebiotics! As discussed in Chapter 3,
this means that they are fuel to grow and energize the healthy bacteria in your
gut and ultimately yield more postbiotic SCFAs.
   Perhaps you’ve heard of the low FODMAP diet? The idea is that appropriate
restriction of FODMAPs can reduce digestive distress in people with irritable
bowel syndrome. And for some patients with irritable bowel syndrome this does
work. The problem is that many people, doctors included, have misinterpreted
these studies to mean that FODMAPs should be eliminated permanently. But
this cuts against the Golden Rule. Plant-based diversity is the greatest predictor
of a healthy gut. And, again, FODMAPs are actually incredibly healthy and most
of them are prebiotics.
   So what happens if we permanently restrict FODMAPs? Their restriction, in
the setting of the low FODMAP diet, may lead to harm of the beneficial bacteria
and a drop in total bacterial count. So now we have fewer SCFA-producing
bacteria and simultaneously are restricting prebiotics. This is a recipe for less
postbiotic SCFAs. Not good.
   Finally, the restrictive nature of the low FODMAP diet can lead to
micronutrient deficiencies. In one study the low FODMAP diet led to significant
declines in several important micronutrients: retinol, thiamin, riboflavin, and
calcium. What this means is that if we want a healthy gut, then we actually need
our fructans and galacto-oligosaccharides.
   It’s important to recognize that the low FODMAP diet, as developed at
Monash University in Australia, was never meant to be a permanent elimination
diet. Instead, it was meant to be a temporary FODMAP restriction for two to six
weeks followed by a systematic reintroduction of the FODMAPs. The actual
point of the diet is that our food sensitivities may vary among the categories of
FODMAPs and that increased awareness of this can make us smart consumers.
This is exactly how these FODMAP categories should be used: If you have
difficulty in dealing with one particular category, then you know where the
weakness in your gut lies and that you may need to go slow and easy on building
up strength there. If you want a list of foods that fall into certain FODMAP
categories, email me at fodmap@theplantfedgut.com and I’ll send you what you
need.
   Bringing it back full circle now, we know that following the Golden Rule and
maximizing plant-based diversity in our diet is the key to a healthier gut. It
offers the prebiotic fiber and micronutrients in both balance and variety. This is
fiber fuel for health. The result is a strong gut microbiota that’s firing on all
cylinders and optimizing health throughout our entire body.
   But many of us are going to have difficulty in processing our plant
carbohydrates, specifically fiber and FODMAPs. The reason for this is that we
humans rely almost entirely on our gut microbiota to do this work for us, so if
the gut is damaged, then the struggle is real!
   It’s incredibly important to understand that the plant foods we need the most
to get our gut stronger are also the same foods that cause digestive distress in
people with a damaged gut. Yes, it’s frustrating. But it’s the way it works, and
we’re about results so it’s important to know the rules of the game. So how do
we break this vicious cycle, get our guts back, and start enjoying more plant food
in our diet? We have to treat our gut like a muscle and train it. Think of Rocky,
running through the streets of Philadelphia and up the steps of the Museum of
Art. He didn’t just wake up one morning and do that. It took time and effort to
build up that level of fitness to propel him to the championship. That’s what the
Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks (see Chapter 10) is going to be for you. It’s a structured
four-week plan to start from scratch and build that gut.
   Ultimately, the plan will help you understand the FODMAPs your gut is good
with and which ones it needs help with. As we progressively introduce fiber and
FODMAPs, it’s important to start low and go slow. This may be the most
important sentence in the chapter, so please sear this one into your brain. To
properly train our gut, we need to start low and go slow with fiber and
FODMAPs. Low and slow to grow—that’s the motto. You feel me? That’s the
“Rocky” approach to building up your gut fitness. You can do this. And I’m here
to help you.




To view the 25+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                                 6
Fermentation Nation Rising
    The benefits of fermented foods for gut health and where to start




Are you ready to unlock the full nutritional value of your food and take your
plant-based diversity to a level that you didn’t even know existed? Allow me to
introduce you to one of my secret weapons—fermented foods.
   I’m obsessed with fermented foods. They are really cool because they give
our food a complete makeover on several levels. You start with something
already delicious, sprinkle some fermentation magic (or science) on top, and the
ingredient is transformed into a new healthy food.
   At the crossroads of our gut microbiota and food lies fermentation. What
happens inside a jar of fermenting sauerkraut is a microcosm of what’s
happening inside our guts. It’s the same process and the same concept but it’s
happening before our eyes on our kitchen counters: millions of invisible
microbes, working in a coordinated symphony right there in front of us. We
can’t see them, but we can see and taste the difference in their work. It’s quite
remarkable.
   Every single culture in human history has fermented foods as a celebrated part
of their food tradition. You have sauerkraut from Germany, kvass from Russia,
kimchi from Korea, natto and miso from Japan, tempeh from Indonesia, and if
you’ve ever had Ethiopian food you know that spongy tangy fermented bread
called injera. Even sourdough bread, made by fermenting flour, has roots in the
California and Klondike Gold Rush—that’s what those guys in the mountains
used to eat. If you study the food traditions of any culture, you will find
fermentation at its heart. Sadly, we let go of our traditional foods in exchange for
hypersterile, chemical-laden convenience foods offered up by our food industry.
But it’s time to say, “Enough!” Today we can embrace fermented foods as the
next frontier in our quest for plant-based diversity. A little fermented food every
day goes a long way.



My introduction to fermented foods
As a kid, I never would have dreamed that fermented foods would be a future
obsession. But the more I learned about SCFAs, gut microbiota, and the power
of plants for gut health, the more curious I became about fermentation. So it was
serendipity that one of my patients came in raving about how helpful sauerkraut
and pickles had been for his digestive issues. That was it—I couldn’t wait
another day. I had to try it.
   So I set out to make my first batch of sauerkraut. I found the recipe and the
process to be so refreshingly basic. It’s just water, salt, and cabbage. That’s it.
So simple. No need to add any starter culture—all the microbes you need are
already part of the cabbage microbiome. But sinking my hands into the chopped
cabbage and working on it to release some of the juices and soften it made me
feel connected to the food. It was a living food.
   I popped my mason jar of water, salt, and cabbage on the kitchen counter
where it sat for weeks. Yes, weeks! My wife and I were a little bit scared of it, to
be honest. It felt so weird to have food that’s not in the fridge. How could this be
okay to eat?
   After a few weeks, we tried it. It was . . . very crunchy! I didn’t expect that. It
was tangy and acidic, too—and delicious. I took more bites. Many more. I was
in fermented nirvana. It’s been a daily part of my life ever since.


The bacterial artistry behind fermentation and healthy soil
Perhaps you haven’t spent a lot of time thinking about food decomposition, but
this is exactly what Louis Pasteur was thinking about when he discovered
modern germ theory in the 1860s. By studying how wine is created from grapes
and how milk spoils, he started to understand that microorganisms are at the
heart of all of it. Understanding the process of food decomposition is an
important part of assessing the nutritional value of our food.
   These bacteria that are responsible for the decomposition of our perishable
items—aren’t they a bad thing? Certainly they frustrate and enrage us when we
miss that preciously small window of avocado perfection, or when we find some
lettuce we forgot in the back of our fridge that now seems like some sort of
nightmare science experiment. So, yes, when our food becomes inedible it’s kind
of a drag, but really that’s nature saying, “Hey, you had your chance to eat this
food, now I’m taking it back.”
   It doesn’t just take it back, though—when we compost our food, we’re
actually empowering nature to do its thing and recycle it: Similar to digestion,
the microbes work in teams and use varied enzymes to break down and
transform our food. Allowing the natural life cycle of dead plant matter to unfold
produces humic substances—humic acids, fulvic acids, and humin. These humic
substances form the basis of healthy soil, and healthy soil grows healthy plants,
which feed our microbiota to help us be healthy humans. It’s a beautiful part of
the circle of life.
   Soil health is vastly underrated and something we should take very seriously
for the health of both ourselves and our planet. Bottom line: Your food is only as
healthy as your soil, which means that you are only as healthy as your soil. We
desperately need microbe- and humic-enriched soil. But yes, along that path of
transformation to humus what starts as food does eventually become inedible.
We don’t need to fear this; we simply need to accept that the life cycle of our
food has passed the window of human nutrition and is now moving toward soil
nutrition.
   But here’s where the magic comes in: Microbes cause degradation, but when
you tweak those microbes you can transform the process dramatically. That’s
fermentation in a nutshell. Instead of allowing a food to decompose and break
down, you introduce a different band of bacteria that will actually prolong the
life of the food and alter it. We do this with the bacteria that naturally live on the
plant. They’re already there as a part of the plant’s microbiome; all you have to
do is create the right conditions to be successful.
   Let’s take sauerkraut as an example. The first thing that happens when you
make sauerkraut by fermenting cabbage is that anaerobic bacteria begin
producing healthy acids to drop the pH of the solution. Anaerobic means they
thrive where there is no oxygen, so by putting the cabbage underwater you’re
creating the proper conditions for anaerobes to grow. As this happens, the acid
levels become too high for many bacteria, allowing Leuconostoc mesenteroides
to take over within twenty-four hours, producing more healthy acids to drop the
pH even further. If you’re making sauerkraut at home, you’ll know Leuconostoc
is present when you start seeing the bubbles form. Over the following week, the
environment becomes increasingly acidic, which leads to the growth of
Lactobacillus plantarum, the primary bacteria responsible for transforming
saltwater cabbage into kraut.
   Back in Chapter 3 we discussed how SCFAs (short-chain fatty acids) actually
reduce the pH in the colon, which inhibits pathogenic bacteria and promotes the
growth of SCFA-producing commensal bacteria. You can apply that same
concept here to our ferment—the drop in pH inhibits pathogenic as well as
decomposing species and promotes the growth of the right species responsible
for fermentation. This is the first example of how the process in a mason jar can
mimic what’s happening in our gut. Isn’t it amazing that by altering the blend of
bacteria, we can actually inhibit food spoilage and prolong the life of our food?


    How microbes clean up our mess and don’t even
    get a “thank you”
         As a demonstration of the cleansing, restoring power of microbes in nature, consider the
         Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. This oil spill dumped an estimated 4.2 million barrels of
         oil in the Gulf of Mexico. Folks, that’s more than a billion venti Starbucks filled with oil and
         dumped into the ocean. To me, dumping even one venti Starbucks’ worth of oil would be a
         disgrace. It was an environmental catastrophe, causing widespread harm to marine life and its
         ecosystems from the ocean floor to the surface, extending from deep water to the coastal tidal
         marshes. It was the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history, and frankly it was disgusting. But
         we’re not seeing oil in the Gulf water or beaches anymore. So how did the ocean heal itself?
             A group of researchers from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory recently showed
         that bacterial species survived within the oil plumes and together in cooperative fashion, these
         bacteria took up the challenge of degrading 4.2 million barrels. The study discovered that it
         was the right bacteria working at the right time in a cooperative fashion to clean the ocean.
         Personally, I think we need to stop destroying this planet and hoping our friendly Earthly
         microbes will bail us out, but to witness the incredible healing power of these microbes in real
         time is amazing, isn’t it? This concept of bacteria functioning in teams with the right microbe
         stepping up at the right time is the same process you’ll find in fermentation, healthy soil
         production, and even carbohydrate digestion in your gut. Invisible microbes are everywhere,
         doing amazing things without us even recognizing them.




A brief history of fermentation and food preservation
Fermented foods are at the heart of our human origin story. Our ancestors had a
major problem that they needed to overcome: They had no way of preserving
food. It held back the growth of the tribe, required constant attention to food
finding, and forced the nomadic lifestyle on them. There was no settling down.
For human civilization to move forward—organized society, cities, an economy,
all of it—we needed to leave the famine behind and find food security by
stockpiling and delayed-return subsistence. Once again, the microbes came to
our rescue.
   We don’t know exactly when fermentation was discovered. Fourteen-
thousand-year-old bread was recently found at a Natufian hunter-gatherer camp
in Jordan. There’s a cave in Israel where they found a wheat/barley-based beer
mixture dating back thirteen thousand years. In Sweden there are ninety-two-
hundred-year-old pits in the ground used to preserve large quantities of fish. In
China researchers found a nine-thousand-year-old rice, honey, and fruit libation
similar to rice wine. The bottom line is that fermentation started popping up in
cultures around the world at a similar time, and appears to be one of the major
developments contributing to the rise of human civilization.
   For thousands of years this was one of our principle forms of food
preservation and a celebrated part of our ancient traditions. But in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries we developed new approaches to food preservation:
canning, pasteurization, numerous preservatives, refrigeration, and freezing. Our
dependence on fermentation for preservation was marginalized and, particularly
in a melting-pot nation such as the United States, food traditions that included
fermented foods were lost. Did we make a major mistake by turning to new
forms of food preservation? I’d say so.
   All food preservation techniques work by altering the microbes. For example,
canning works through sterilization. Food is heated to destroy the bacteria, then
sealed in a vacuum-tight container. The sealed, sterile contents aren’t exposed to
microbes and their enzymes of food decomposition and therefore remain
preserved until the can is opened. But is this completely benign? We previously
learned that an apple has one hundred million microbes in its microbiome, many
of which are known to be beneficial to humans. To sterilize is to destroy the
plant microbiome and any health benefits that would come from it.
   How about the thousands of chemical preservatives in our processed foods?
Consider the turkey or ham that sits in a deli refrigerator for months on end, with
a few slices taken off every once in a while. The bread that stays soft for weeks
without hardening or molding. The crackers wrapped up in a box that are as
fresh as the day they were manufactured. Since processed foods are part of our
daily world, we don’t spend enough time questioning them or considering how
unnatural they are.
   I think you know where I’m going here. To pasteurize is to transiently kill the
microbes and sterilize our food. But most of our food today is on a whole new
level—not just sterilized, but actually crossbred with chemical preservatives that
are developed with the intention of inhibiting microbes and their food-processing
enzymes.
   Our Food and Drug Administration labels them as “benign” or “nontoxic” to
the consumer. I can’t help but consider what these chemicals designed to retard
microbes do when introduced to the dense population of microbes in our colon.
In one study, sulfites damaged these four probiotic superstars: Lactobacillus
casei, L. plantarum, L. rhamnosus, and Streptococcus thermophilus. Those were
the only four tested, so we don’t know what happens with the others. There’s
certainly room for more research to help us understand the best way to preserve
our food without compromising our gut microbiota. In the meantime, I’ll happily
munch my organic fruits and veggies.



Unleash the full potential in your food
Food preservation doesn’t always have to be about destroying the microbes.
Fermentation is one of the rare examples of food processing that actually makes
our food even more healthy. When you think of fermentation, think of
transformation. The taste and appearance get a reboot. We’re breeding new
microbes, transforming fiber, and generating bioactive peptides and polyphenols.
All parts of our food have the possibility of changing. It’s absolutely fascinating
stuff that the scientific community is just beginning to understand.
   You’ve noticed that fermented foods are often sour to some degree? As we
discussed with sauerkraut, fermentation causes the release of acids that lower the
pH and alter the balance of bacteria. These acids often have health-promoting
properties themselves beyond just altering the balance of bacteria. For example,
lactic acid has been shown to reduce inflammation and have antioxidant
properties in the gut. Therefore, if a fraction of the lactic acid found in a ferment
makes it to the small intestine, benefits ensue. Studies have shown that vinegar,
the product of fermentation of alcohol, can improve insulin sensitivity, improve
fullness after meals to promote weight loss, and may lower blood pressure and
cholesterol.
   The acidic environment helps to grow the right microbes. Fermented foods
with live active cultures can contain upward of a billion microorganisms per
gram or milliliter of food. Compared to the hyper-sterilized diet in the Western
world, the consumption of fermented foods could increase the number of
microbes in the diet by up to 10,000 fold. In the study comparing five days on a
plant-based versus animal-based diet, Drs. Lawrence David and Peter Turnbaugh
were surprised to find that foodborne microbes survived transit and were
metabolically active, suggesting that the microbes naturally occurring in and on
our food really may provide benefit to humans.
   But before these microbes begin their incredible journey through our
intestines, they first get to work on unpacking the hidden nutrition in our food.
Working in teams, they use their enzymes like the tools of a mechanic. For
example, Lactobacillus species have specific enzymes—glycoside hydrolases,
esterases, decarboxylases, and phenolic acid reductases—to enhance conversion
of health-promoting flavonoids in cherries and broccoli into biologically active
metabolites. These are the same Lactobacillus species that grow in your gut
when you consume prebiotic fiber. We talked before about how glycoside
hydrolases are the enzymes used to break down fiber, and here you see them
showing up in our fermented food, the point being that what the microbes do
during fermentation mirrors what they do during digestion.


    Microbial enzymes can be natural
    pharmaceuticals
         Nattokinase is an enzyme produced when boiled soybeans are fermented to form natto, a
         traditional food in Japan. Natto has been used as a folk remedy for diseases of the heart and
         blood vessels for hundreds of years, and now we know why. Recent research has found that
         nattokinase has potent clot-busting, blood pressure–lowering, cholesterol-controlling, platelet-
         stunning, and plaque-stabilizing properties. Basically it’s like taking aspirin, heparin, blood
         pressure pills, and a statin all in one. The perfect cardiac cocktail. It comes as no surprise that
         drug companies are trying to figure out how they can turn this into a pill. But I say, why don’t
         we just eat natto?



   These enzymes allow our microbes to create nutrition where it didn’t
previously exist. For example, these microbial magicians are able to synthesize
vitamin K and B vitamins—folate, riboflavin, and B12—from non-vitamin
precursors. Melatonin and GABA are both synthesized, too. Melatonin is a
powerful antioxidant that I’ve seen help people with acid reflux. GABA has a
calming effect on the brain and helps regulate blood pressure.
   Any part of the food can be transformed during fermentation. For example,
the microbes create supercharged forms of fiber called exopolysaccharides.
They’ve been shown to inhibit unhealthy microbes, regulate the immune system,
squash inflammation, lower cholesterol, and even protect against cancer. If that
sounds an awful lot like what prebiotic fiber and SCFAs were shown to do in
Chapter 3, that’s because that’s exactly what’s happening—prebiotic
exopolysaccharides produced during fermentation are then fermented by
intestinal microbiota to release postbiotic SCFAs. The point being, our gut
thrives on diversity of fiber and, by creating exopolysaccharides, we are adding
to that diversity to support our gut microbiome. Powerful stuff, folks.
   We’re only beginning to study fermented foods and the bioactive molecules
the microbes create. The proteins, phytochemicals, and polyphenols in food may
all undergo transformation during fermentation. Here are just a few examples of
what we are learning:


                    Fermentation of red ginseng increases the number of bioactive
                    saponins and helps to control blood sugar.
                    Twenty-five different antioxidant peptides have been found in
                    different types of sourdough.
                    Fermentation of soy milk with Lactobacillus paracasei or L.
                    plantarum activates isoflavones to increase bone volume and
                    thickness in the fight against osteoporosis.


   Fermentation can also practice addition by subtraction, meaning that it can
enhance the nutritive qualities in the food by reducing the anti-nutritional
compounds. Specifically, fermentation is known to reduce gluten, phytic acid
content, and FODMAPs. For this reason, people with IBS generally tolerate
sourdough bread better than traditional wheat bread. Oh, and those vicious, life-
threatening lectins you’ve been hearing about? Fermentation removes 95 percent
of them.
   Just like bacteria can help us clean up an oil spill, they can also help us
biodegrade and reduce pesticide residues on our plants. You can probably
predict what I’m about to say, because there’s a theme that keeps reemerging in
nature. Teams of microbes have hydrolytic enzymes that allow them to
dismantle and deactivate the pesticides.



FAQ
So if fermented foods are so great, what’s stopping us? Let me take a few of the
concerns head on.
Is it safe to eat fermented foods?
As long as fermentation is properly done, fermented foods are absolutely safe.
This isn’t creating unhealthy, contaminated food, it is actually cleaning it up.
People worry about getting a bad bug or gastroenteritis, yet there are literally no
reported cases of food poisoning. The large outbreaks of Salmonella or E. coli
you’ve heard about are related to contamination of raw vegetables. Understand
two things about these outbreaks: First, the process of fermentation would
eliminate these pathogenic bacteria. Remember, that’s why wine was added to
water in ancient times. But second and even more important, these are the
consequences of industrial animal agriculture. There is no great way to dispose
of the feces, and ultimately the large ponds of stool run off when it rains.
What about botulism?
Botulism is a rare but very serious neurological disease caused by a bacteria
called Clostridium botulinum. People often inappropriately associate it with
fermentation because they know that botulism can be the result of food
preservation gone wrong. But to be clear, botulism is associated with canning,
not fermentation. C. botulinum can produce a spore that’s resistant to high
temperature, surviving the pasteurization step in canning and then thriving in the
oxygen-deprived environment of the can.
   On the flip side, fermentation intentionally avoids high heat (which would kill
the bacteria, including the good ones) and instead allows those friendly microbes
to produce acid, which destroys C. botulinum.
How will I know that I’m doing it properly and growing the right bacteria?
It’s actually rather simple. Just use your senses and be smart and intuitive as you
observe the process. Do you see something that looks like mold—fuzzy and
round, potentially colored blue, black, or pink, generally on the surface of the
ferment? Technically you can skim it off, but I tend to err on the side of just
starting over. I also start over if there’s anything that smells off or looks funny in
the ferment. Point being, I play it safe.
Can fermented foods cause cancer?
If we’re discussing all fermented foods, then yes, processed meat or fish have
been associated with colorectal, nasopharyngeal, esophageal, lung, stomach, and
pancreatic cancer. When it comes to fermented veggies, the main concern has
been stomach cancer. Epidemiologic studies from East Asia have found an
association between stomach cancer and pickled vegetable consumption.
Stomach cancer is a huge problem in East Asia, where it is the second most
common cancer. Most cases are the result of Helicobacter pylori, a carcinogenic
bacteria that lives in the stomach of 60 to 70 percent of Japanese and Koreans.
Still, only a fraction of colonized individuals develop stomach cancer. So where
do fermented veggies fit in? It turns out that salt and its by-products actually
accelerate the inflammation and cancer development in the stomach lining.
Should we be concerned and avoid fermented veggies with salt? No. We should
moderate our salt intake, which is a smart move from the get-go. We should also
recognize that these foods are consumed at every meal in East Asia, and that
we’re going to be consuming them at a fraction of the quantity. We also have a
much lower prevalence of H. pylori in the United States, and most strains are not
the one widely associated with cancer.
   Two main points here: First, consuming anything to ridiculous excess is bad
for you. We need oxygen to live, but pure oxygen is actually toxic. Second, let’s
all just take a deep breath, partially to just chill for a moment; partially to
reinforce the point that oxygen is completely safe at a normal dose, even if we
know it can be dangerous if you have too much of it, too. There can always be
too much of a good thing.



Fermented favorites
Now that we’ve addressed some of the big themes in fermented foods, let me
introduce you to some of the superstars of fermentation:


Sauerkraut
Where would you place cabbage on a list of the world’s healthiest foods? Is it
top ten? Even top five? We already know that cabbage is incredibly good for us
—low in calories, high in nutrients like vitamin C, high in prebiotic fiber to
support a healthy gut and unleash SCFAs throughout the body. Cabbage is a part
of the cruciferous family, like broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, and kale.
That’s an all-star list, in part because cruciferous veggies contain glucosinolates,
which are potent cancer-fighting phytochemicals. The problem is that
glucosinolates need to be converted into their active form as isothiocyanates in
order to fight cancer. In 2002, a group of Finnish researchers showed that
fermenting cabbage produces the enzymes necessary to unleash these
isothiocyanates. It’s a powerful example of fermentation amping up an already
healthy food and taking it to another level.


      Make your own sauerkraut!
          It’s fun, delicious, and healthy! Before you get started, let me just say that part of making
          fermented foods is experimenting and trying new things. Rather than searching the Internet for
          specific proportions, I’d really encourage you to pull an Emeril and just go *BAM* and throw
          some stuff in the mason jar and see what happens. It’s more fun. Here’s how you do it:

 1.                          Lightly rinse your cabbage. Nothing aggressive that would kill the
                          bacteria. Peel back the top two layers of leaves.
 2.                       Chop the cabbage to your desired kraut thickness. I like it thick! Put your
                          hands into the cabbage and work on it to break it up and soften. Feel that
                          connection to the food.
 3.                       Pack into a 1-quart mason jar. Feel free to add garlic cloves, caraway
                          seeds, or spices if you like. No recipes here! It’s fun to experiment. I use a
                          wooden sauerkraut pounder to pack it in. Fill the jar about 75 percent.
 4.                       Add a fermentation weight on top. There are glass fermentation weights
                          available commercially. Some people clean a rock from their yard and
                          others use a few cabbage leaves for packing. The key is to use something
                          heavy enough to keep everything submerged.
 5.                       Make a sea salt brine by mixing 1 cup of water with roughly 1¼ teaspoons
                          of sea salt. I honestly don’t measure, I just go by taste. It should taste salty,
                          but not so salty that you wouldn’t take a sip of it. The water needs to be
                          chlorine free, so either use distilled water, or boil water and let it return to
                          room temperature. The salt needs to be iodine free, which is why I use sea
                          salt.
 6.                       Pour the sea salt brine over the chopped cabbage and cover with the
                          fermentation weight. You want to completely cover the cabbage and
                          weight but still leave a little room at the top. I remove any bits and pieces
                          of cabbage that float to the surface.
 7.                       Cover the mason jar, ideally with an airlock that allows it to vacuum seal
                          and burp on its own. If you don’t use a valve to allow gas to escape, you’ll
                          need to “burp” the kraut once a day to release pressure from the gas that
                          builds up.
 8.                       Place in a cool location for 1 to 4 weeks to ferment. Ideal temperature is
                          less than 70 degrees Fahrenheit. I usually start tasting after about a week
                          and find that it gets better with age.
 9.                       If you notice a white, powdery yeast at the surface, that’s kahm yeast. It’s
                          common, it’s not mold, and it’s not harmful to your health. Simply scoop
                          it off the surface with a paper towel. If it’s fuzzy looking, blue, or green,
                          and looks like mold, that’s because it is. Some people remove it and still
                          eat the ferment. I personally toss the batch and start over.
10.                       Two things that have a big effect on fermentation are the storage
                          temperature and salinity of the brine. The cooler the temperature, the
                          slower the ferment progresses, which is usually a good thing. Too fast and
                          it can cause mold. In similar fashion, increased salinity also slows down
                          the process and protects against mold.

          If at any point you decide that you want to stop progression of the fermentation, just throw
      it in the fridge. It’s like shouting “Freeze!” to the microbes. Fermentation pauses and the kraut
      is good for months stored there.
Kimchi
There’s not much separating kimchi from sauerkraut; they’re really just two
celebrated expressions of fermented cabbage from cultures on opposite sides of
the world. In the case of kimchi, it is often mixed with other vegetables such as
onions, garlic, hot peppers, and radishes to generate a spicy fermented salad of
sorts. Once again, microbes are the stars here, and in the process of
transforming, kimchi rewards us with phytochemicals, healthy acids, volatile
compounds, and free amino acids.
   Kimchi is a celebrated tradition in Korea, and each region has its own unique
spin on the dish. It’s normal to have a small side of kimchi with nearly every
meal, and the average Korean eats forty-eight pounds of it per year. Forty-eight
pounds! Here are some of the proven benefits of kimchi:


               Gives rise to multiple probiotic strains of bacteria shown to
               survive stomach acid and provide health benefits in the colon.
               Lowers cholesterol.
               Promotes weight loss!
               Includes anti-inflammatory and potentially antiaging properties.
               Improves insulin sensitivity to prevent and reverse diabetes.
               Boosts multiple mechanisms by which it may protect us from
               cancer.


  When it comes to eating kimchi, I love it for its spicy flavor but I’ll readily
admit it’s not for everyone. My wife loves sauerkraut, but she’ll never be a
kimchi girl because she’s not into spicy like I am. For me, I love kimchi as a
condiment, or I like to throw it in a soup or rice bowl to add a unique flavor and
extra spice. A little goes a long way.


Miso
I’m a huge miso fan! Miso is a paste made by fermenting soybeans with a
fungus called Aspergillus oryzae. If you’ve never used it before, you have no
clue what you’re missing. It’s both salty and savory at the same time, so it has a
lot of umami. On a cold day it’s so easy to just warm up some water and add a
big scoop of miso to it for an impromptu miso soup. Even better if you have
some fresh chives to cut on top and some seaweed to toss in. Miso offers:
                Protection from cancer. Miso may help prevent breast, colorectal,
                and liver cancer. This is actually a by-product of its soy content
                and the isoflavones, which are those scary “phytoestrogens” that
                some have vilified. It is important to set the record straight.
                And if you are worried about salt content and your blood
                pressure, fear not. Studies suggest miso does not raise blood
                pressure despite its salt content.
                Healthy bones! Calcium, vitamin K, and isoflavones all
                contribute to osteoporosis prevention.


   Why drink an energy drink, another cup of coffee, or even tea when you could
have a miso sipper for a healthy afternoon pick-me-up? You’ll find this as one of
the things we do during the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks (see Chapter 10), but you can
start today if you like. Simply purchase fermented organic miso. You’ll find
different colors—darker means stronger and saltier. White is sweeter, yellow has
an earthy flavor, and red is bold with umami. I personally like red the most, but
some recipes call for a gentler touch. Just add miso to warm water, stir until it
dissolves into a beautiful broth, and drink! The key here is to add the miso when
the water is lukewarm. If the water is scalding hot, then you’ll kill the live
bacteria in the miso. But if you add it to warm but not scalding water, you’ll be
good and still get the benefits.


Tempeh
Tempeh is another fermented soy product from Indonesia that has a nice, dense
consistency and an earthy flavor. It’s fun to cook with tempeh because it tends to
absorb the flavor of whatever spice or sauce that you throw at it. So what you
have here is a versatile, delicious, and nutrient-dense food. The health benefits
are the same as miso because tempeh is also made from fermented soybeans. It’s
really the way that tempeh can be used that makes it unique because it’s a great
source of protein that keeps its shape and can be steamed, pan-fried, blackened,
or just crumbled raw over a salad or soup. It makes for great chili, stir-fries,
sandwiches, stews, salads, and soups. One of my favorites is a tempeh Reuben,
with nice dark rye bread, Thousand Island dressing, and some sauerkraut.


     What about fermented dairy?
          Why no love for kefir, yogurt, and other fermented dairy products? Let’s look more closely at
          these foods. As we know, fermentation transforms our food and in many cases makes it easier
          to digest. This is particularly true with dairy products, where fermentation will remove most
          lactose. In fact, most hard cheeses, kefir, and yogurt are generally well tolerated by lactose-
          intolerant individuals. There are also some studies suggesting that kefir, yogurt, and other
          fermented dairy products may have health benefits. However, these studies were largely
          fraught with methodological limitations or were overtly paid for by the dairy industry.
              So what are we supposed to make of corporate-sponsored research that is essentially a form
          of marketing and only being published because it makes the food look good and the
          conclusions are carefully guarded to protect the product? From my perspective, why take any
          risk when you can find delicious fermented nondairy yogurt and kefir? In particular, I love a
          coconut milk kefir that’s available in Canada. No matter what you choose, make sure to pay
          attention to the sugar content, which is one of the big issues with all commercial products of
          this sort. Also, it should be noted that water kefir has absolutely nothing to do with milk and is
          much more similar to kombucha.




Sourdough bread
One of the things I love about sourdough bread is how simple it is to make. Just
flour and water. Where’s the yeast, you ask? It’s true that baking bread generally
requires baker’s yeast, or Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for leavening. In the case of
sourdough, you use a sourdough starter that contains a unique blend of wild
yeast instead of the domesticated commercial yeast. Here’s where it gets cool:
You don’t need to buy a starter if you don’t want. Wild yeast is everywhere—in
the air, in your flour, on the surface of grapes. So it’s possible to use just water
and flour to create your own starter, which will naturally be colonized by wild
yeast to leaven your bread. But once you create a starter culture, you could use it
pretty much forever. For example, the famous Boudin Bakery in San Francisco
still uses the same yeast culture created by Isidore Boudin more than 170 years
ago.
   There are several other things I love about sourdough. First, it’s delicious! I
absolutely love that tangy flavor, soft bread, and flaky crust. Second,
fermentation removes several of the antinutrients that some people worry about.
For example, phytic acid is reduced by 62 percent. As we discussed earlier,
sourdough also has less gluten and it’s often better tolerated by those who are
gluten intolerant. Finally, sourdough has a lower glycemic index compared to
other types of bread, meaning that it causes less of a blood sugar spike and
insulin response. I don’t go out of my way to get more bread in my diet, but
when I do eat bread I generally opt for sourdough. Rye and organic whole wheat
can be great, too.
Kombucha
Kombucha is a fermented, lightly effervescent tea beverage that’s all the rage.
Sales are skyrocketing while people’s health hopes are being hitched to this
trendy beverage. I hate doing this, because I actually love kombucha, but we
need to tone down our enthusiasm a little bit. Kombucha is not the lifesaving
salve that people are hyping it up to be. And we shouldn’t be guzzling it.
    When you create kombucha, you start with old-fashioned sweet tea and
introduce the right mix of bacteria and yeast. Those guys take over, consume the
sugar, and transform the sweet tea into a tart, acidic beverage. In the process
they construct a fibrous floating barrier at the surface called a SCOBY, standing
for symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast. It looks a little like a mushroom. I
used to be scared of it. But then I started making my own kombucha, and have
grown to adore and respect my SCOBY. People tend to hype up the “probiotics”
in kombucha, but I actually love the other stuff—vitamins B1, B6, B12, and C,
antioxidant polyphenols, and healthy acids. Oh, and there’s a little alcohol, but
not enough that you’d drink kombucha for that reason although you should avoid
it if you have a history of alcoholism.
    While kombucha is a beverage that can be a part of a healthy diet, by itself it’s
not going to change your life. But nutrition is all about healthy substitutions. If
you drop soda and replace it with a little kombucha, then you’ve done a good
thing. And I absolutely love making my own kombucha at home and creating
new flavors. I highly recommend it. You shouldn’t drink more than 4 ounces in a
day in my opinion, and I always dilute down my kombucha with water. It still
has plenty of flavor but isn’t quite so acidic. This helps alleviate one of the
concerns of kombucha’s acidity, which is that it can erode the enamel on your
teeth.

                                         ■

I hope you see why fermented foods are an important part of the Fiber Fueled
approach! Not only are they delicious but they’re super-powered plant foods that
have amazing healing abilities for your gut. If you don’t eat many fermented
foods now, have no fear. We’re going to work them in nice and easy in my four-
week plan. A little every day goes a long way. By the end you’ll be in fermented
nirvana, too.
To view the 45+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                              7
Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Postbiotics
     Piecing together the “lesser biotics” to optimize your postbiotics
                                                             (SCFAs)




I believe plants form the backbone of a healthy diet, and I wholeheartedly
believe in the Golden Rule of maximizing plant-based diversity. Food comes
first. Always.
   But prebiotic and probiotic supplements can help accelerate the process of
getting you Fiber Fueled, especially if digesting fiber is a challenge due to a
damaged gut. The benefit of pre- and probiotic supplementation, particularly for
anyone struggling with gut issues, is that we can augment the prebiotic fiber or
healthy microbes in the gut in a targeted way without asking the gut to deal with
anything else.
   The healing effects can be profound and widespread. Pre- and probiotic
supplements can improve our ability to process fiber and FODMAPs and also
reduce the digestive distress that comes from dysbiosis and a damaged gut
microbiome. Using our gut fitness analogy, it’s like working out your shoulders
and feeling the effect of the shoulder workout when you bench-press. To
properly train our gut, we need to start low and go slow with fiber and
FODMAPs. Gut-health supplements can help. Let me show you.



The benefits of prebiotic supplements
Let’s dive straight in. If you struggle with gut issues—bloating, flatulence, and
so on—you might want to try a prebiotic supplement. Here are some of the
positive outcomes we’ve seen in studies on prebiotic fiber supplementation:


               Growth of SCFA-producing gut microbes like Bifidobacterium
               and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
               Reduced counts of unhealthy microbes such as Bacteroides
               intestinalis, B. vulgatus, and Propionibacterium
               Reduced bacterial endotoxin levels
               Reduced inflammatory markers like C-reactive protein,
               interleukin-6, or tumor necrosis factor
               Improvement in parameters of diabetes including lower
               postprandial blood sugar and insulin concentrations
               Lower total cholesterol
               Lower triglycerides
               Increased HDL cholesterol (the good cholesterol)
               Reduced fat mass
               Improved satiety with an increase in satiety hormones GLP-1 and
               peptide YY
               Improved absorption of calcium and magnesium


   In a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of patients with IBS (both diarrhea
and constipation variants included), researchers found that prebiotic
galactooligosaccharides enhanced the growth of healthy gut bugs like
Bifidobacteria, improved stool consistency to enhance bowel movement bliss,
caused less flatulence and less bloating, and improved global symptoms of
irritable bowel syndrome.
   Now this is all well and good, but there’s something interesting I found when
I dug into the details of the study. They didn’t just give people a single dose of a
prebiotic and see what happened; they gave them one of two doses—low and
high. What’s interesting is that the lower dose of fiber actually produced more
clinical improvement, meaning less bloating and less flatulence. How could this
be? It comes back to our motto. When we’re dealing with fiber and FODMAPs,
low and slow is the way to grow. So when we introduce prebiotic supplements,
more isn’t necessarily better. Instead, let’s start at a nice low dose and work our
way up over time.
Choosing the right prebiotic for you
If you do decide to move forward with a prebiotic supplement, then the next
question is “Which one?” We know from Chapter 3 that there are millions of
types of fiber, and they’re all different. Likewise, there are different formulations
of prebiotic supplements and it is difficult to know which one exactly is going to
be the right choice for you. It’s about how that specific prebiotic interacts with
the balance of gut microbes residing inside you.
   With those thoughts in mind, here are a few favorites I use myself and with
my patients:


               BETA GLUCANS: Found in oats, barley, wheat, and rye. Also
               found in seaweed and reishi, shiitake, and maitake mushrooms.
               PSYLLIUM: Comes from the outer coating, or “husk,” of the
               plantago plant’s seeds.
               PARTIALLY HYDROLYZED GUAR GUM: Derived from guar
               seed, a leguminous plant grown mainly in India and Pakistan.
               ACACIA POWDER: Made by grinding up acacia gum, a product
               of the acacia tree native to Africa. Can be taken in powder,
               capsule, or tablet form.
               WHEAT DEXTRIN: Most easily available. If you live in the
               United States you’ll find this in virtually every drugstore or
               supermarket as Benefiber. Technically wheat dextrin is separated
               from gluten, but since it is derived from wheat, I still have my
               patients with celiac or wheat allergy avoid this one.
               ISOMALTO-OLIGOSACCHARIDE (IMO): This is prebiotic
               fiber that’s been prepared by fermentation. For example, you’ll
               also find IMOs in miso, soy sauce, and honey. Makes it nice and
               gentle on the gut for the reasons we discussed in the previous
               chapter.


   Each of these supplements is a natural prebiotic soluble fiber supplement
derived from plants and offers some variety of health benefits commonly
associated with prebiotics: promoting the growth of healthy gut microbes,
release of postbiotic SCFAs, decrease in colon pH–inhibiting pathogenic
bacteria, improvement of dysbiosis, correction of both diarrhea and constipation,
lower cholesterol, blood sugar control, and protection against colorectal cancer.
I’ve also found that these particular prebiotics are well tolerated relative to
others. By comparison, there’s a commonly used prebiotic called inulin out
there. I’ve tried it a few times and every time I have noticed a substantial
increase in gas and flatulence. So it’s not my favorite.
   Is one of these clearly superior to the others? No, I wouldn’t say that. I’ve
tried all of them and have also used them in countless patients, and my
experience has shown me that the fiber interacts with your unique, personal gut
microbiota and so different people respond differently. The key is to experiment.
   The way you add these into your diet is not complicated—it doesn’t matter
that much what time you take them unless you have diabetes or high cholesterol.
In that case, you’ll want to take them with meals. The more important thing is to
take them consistently and to start slow and low and work your way up to
tolerance. Start with one dosage a day to ease your body into it. I like to get my
daily dose of prebiotics in my morning coffee. They are soluble fiber and so they
dissolve in liquid easily. You honestly don’t even know they’re there.
   The last thing is to remember that the one Golden Rule—plant-based diversity
—applies to your prebiotics, too. I personally like to mix several different types
of prebiotics into my week, so I can get the gut-building benefits of each. But in
the very beginning, particularly if you have a damaged gut, you want to start
low, go slow, and only do one fiber supplement at a time so you train up your
gut with one type of fiber at a time.



Probiotics: Hype with a sprinkle of science
Let’s look at our formula again for a moment:

                     prebiotics + probiotics = postbiotics
   Okay, we’ve got prebiotics covered in our diet and supplements—check. We
also get an increase in probiotic bacteria by fiber fueling our colon with plant-
based diversity. Double check. But the million-dollar question is: Can we amp
this healing up to an even higher level with a probiotic supplement?
   So what exactly are probiotics? Well, they are live microorganisms—
generally bacteria and/or yeast. But they’re not just any old live microorganisms.
By definition, probiotics are live microorganisms that, when administered in
adequate amounts, you guessed it: “confer a health benefit on the host.” The
theory with probiotics is that they mimic the effects of our intact microbiota. In
other words, just like our healthy gut microbes, these probiotics should optimize
our immune system, reduce inflammation, inhibit the growth of pathogenic
bacteria, correct leaky gut and restore gut barrier integrity, reestablish intestinal
motility, and even improve mood. We’ve seen probiotics work this way in
animal models, but do they translate to humans?
   Right off the bat, let me say that the hype around probiotics is outpacing the
science big time. Sadly, probiotics have gotten popular because of marketing and
because they are what everyone wants—a new pill that’s cutting edge, ideally
natural, that will require zero effort and fix all your problems. But the truth is
that you can’t fix a bad diet with a probiotic. You can’t go low carb, low fiber,
and fix your gut with a probiotic. Returning to our formula: You can’t get to
postbiotics without prebiotics. And you can’t optimize plant-based diversity by
getting all of your fiber from a supplement. It just doesn’t work that way. It’s
time to move past “biohacking” and realize that there are no shortcuts.
   It’s also important to know that probiotics don’t stick. In other words, they
generally don’t colonize your gut permanently, mostly because you already have
a community of bacteria in place and they’re resistant to newcomers. You’re not
adding back new bacteria or ones you lost. If you stop taking the probiotic, then
within two to five days it’ll be like you never took it in the first place. So the
effects of probiotics appear to occur as they transiently pass through the
intestine. But along the way, they’re working their magic, including helping to
unleash SCFAs from our prebiotics. They do give our innate microbes a helping
hand, but then they disappear.


     Fermented foods vs. probiotics
          What’s the difference between fermented foods and probiotics? They both contain live
          bacteria, but beyond that they are very different. A probiotic is a highly concentrated version
          of a limited number of bacterial strains, usually delivered by a capsule of some sort.
          Fermented foods, on the other hand, are living foods that have a wider variety of
          microorganisms but in lower numbers. But with the fermented food you also get all the other
          good stuff—exopolysaccharide prebiotics, vitamins, healthy acids, bioactive peptides, and
          polyphenols—all of which are also providing benefit. Sometimes you need the concentrated
          focus of specific bacterial strains to give your gut a boost, and that’s when you need a
          probiotic. Eating fermented foods regularly should be a part of your long-term plan to promote
          a healthy gut.




The science to support probiotics
It may sound like I don’t believe in probiotics at all, but I recommend them in
my clinic every day, often with great results. Without a doubt, some of you
reading this book would benefit from them. Let’s jump into the science first;
then I’ll explain how to use probiotics effectively.
   Probiotics often help with digestive symptoms and have been shown to
improve abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, constipation, and other symptoms of
irritable bowel syndrome. In inflammatory bowel disease, probiotics have shown
benefit for patients with ulcerative colitis and pouchitis. So far there aren’t any
good studies of benefit in Crohn’s disease.


     Should you take probiotics after antibiotics? The
     answer may surprise you.
          Probiotics are known to treat antibiotic-associated diarrhea in adults. They also protect against
          developing Clostridioides difficile infection. For years I was a believer that the best way to
          recover from antibiotic use was to take a probiotic for a few weeks. But a recent study has
          completely changed my mind. In it, researchers from Israel showed convincingly that
          probiotics actually impair the microbiota’s ability to stabilize and return to normal after
          antibiotics. They actually slow recovery. So unless directly recommended by a doctor, I avoid
          probiotics immediately after antibiotics. Instead, focus on your diet first. Maximize plant-
          based diversity. Then add in prebiotics to help your gut microbes bounce back faster. Avoid
          chemicals, saturated fat, and pesticides in your food. No alcohol. Exercise and get into nature.
          Go to bed early and sleep at least eight hours. And most important, let’s avoid unnecessary
          antibiotic use.



   We previously learned that prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharides can improve
lactose digestion, providing evidence that strengthening the gut can also improve
our capacity to process and digest our food. Using our gut fitness analogy, that’s
like working out your shoulders and then discovering that your bench press got
stronger. In similar fashion, we find that probiotics can also improve our ability
to process lactose. This is important because it suggests that the digestive
enzymes in probiotics may be able to help us break down our carbohydrates and
get the benefits.
   There are now numerous studies to suggest that probiotics may be beneficial
for intestinal bloating. Some specific strains that have been shown to be
beneficial in studies include Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifidobacterium infantis,
L. acidophilus, and Bifidobacterium lactis. Even a group of healthy people
reported that their bowel movements were more blissful when they were using a
daily probiotic.


A more targeted role for probiotics
So yes, probiotics actually do something. Are they a silver bullet as they’re
marketed at times to be, capable of fixing all of our problems? Nope. That is
hype rather than science. Separating fact from fiction requires us to get smart
and understand how probiotics work, and also learn how to be smart shoppers so
we can pick the best one for us.
  Let’s start here . . . diet always comes first. The average human eats eighty
thousand pounds of food during their lifetime, and a supplement will never
overcome a bad diet. But in pre- and probiotics are an additional tool to help you
optimize SCFA levels and restore gut health. Here’s what to prioritize:


 1.                    The Golden Rule—Diversity of Plants
 2.                    Prebiotics
 3.                    Probiotics


   I can’t wait for the day when we can analyze a person’s individual
microbiome, identify the strengths and weaknesses, and then give them the exact
strains in the exact proportions that they need for optimal health or to fix a
problem. Studies are starting to emerge showing us that probiotic colonization
can be personalized. But unfortunately, that day has not arrived yet. So the
current reality is that we’re shooting in the dark. We’re choosing a probiotic
blindly without knowing how it fits with our completely personal, unique
microbiota. We can only hope that it’ll match, but it doesn’t always work that
way. So we have to accept a trial-and-error element. If it works and you notice a
difference, stick with it. If it doesn’t, move on. It may be the best probiotic in the
world, but it doesn’t mean it’s the best probiotic for you.


      Should everyone be taking a pre- and probiotic?
          Are there benefits to prebiotics and probiotics in a healthy population, meaning: Do they boost
          your health if you are not taking them to address any specific symptom or health issue? I
          would argue that prebiotics provide more benefit in this circumstance. In normal, healthy
          adults, prebiotics have still been shown to improve metabolic parameters. For example, they
          help regulate blood sugar after meals, lower insulin concentrations (improved insulin
          sensitivity), and increase satiety to make you feel full faster. I use a prebiotic most days. I’m
          committed to the Golden Rule, so I often rotate through several types. There are definitely
          days that I forget it, and I notice a difference. When I’m taking it, my bowel movements are
          glorious. I’ll just leave it at that.
             As for probiotics, a comprehensive review found that they reduced the incidence, duration,
          and symptoms of the common cold (but not influenza), suggesting an immune benefit. There
          was minimal effect on metabolic parameters such as cholesterol level, weight, blood sugar, or
          insulin with probiotics.
              When considering whether or not prebiotics and probiotics make sense in the absence of
          disease, there are two additional considerations. One is safety. Both have been used
          widespread for decades now by the general population and the safety record has been excellent
          in both health and disease. There are case reports of infectious complications with probiotics,
          one study with increased risk if probiotics are given to someone with severe acute pancreatitis
          and one series where probiotics caused reversible brain fog in a population with severe
          motility disorders. This may sound scary, but consider the millions of people taking a
          probiotic on a daily basis for decades now and that these possibilities are at the most extremely
          rare. It goes without saying that you should discuss these issues with your doctor and
          obviously stop any medicine or supplement that you believe is causing an adverse effect. But
          that said, the safety record of both pre- and probiotics is very good.
              The second consideration is cost. Prebiotics are not very expensive, but a good probiotic is
          around $40. Sure, you can find $5 probiotics at the store, but they’re so impotent you’d be
          better off buying a tub of sauerkraut. So it’s up to you and what works best with your budget.
          Until proven otherwise, I’m a bigger believer in prebiotic supplementation over probiotics if
          you’re healthy and trying to stay that way.



   If you are trying to figure out where to start with a probiotic, start with this
question: What are you trying to accomplish? Do you have a specific symptom
that you’re trying to alleviate? You should have a reason that you’re opting to
take a probiotic, and if you don’t or it’s simply, “I want a healthier gut,” then
food is best. Remember, every plant has its own microbiome. So when we eat
them, there’s a sharing of microbes that occurs, and that’s one advantage of
consuming living food. When we opt for a little fermented food every day, we’re
taking that to the next level.
   But if you have an answer to the question, “What are you trying to
accomplish?” you’ll want to find some studies that have been done to see if
there’s something out there that’s known to work best for your specific issue.
You can head to my website, www.theplantfedgut.com, where I’ve got lots of
resources and support for how to research and choose a probiotic that’s best for
you. Here’s the key: You want to find the probiotic that fits your treatment goal.
You can do this by finding a study that shows a benefit, and then choosing that
probiotic and using it the way they did in the study. For example, if you’re trying
to correct constipation, then you’d look for a probiotic with Bifidobacterium
lactis in at least 17.2 billion colony-forming units (the unit of measurement for
number of bacteria) because that’s what worked for constipation in a placebo-
controlled trial.
   Beyond looking at studies for guidance on which probiotic and at what dose,
I’m a big believer in quality. Here’s a list of the things I look for in assessing
whether a probiotic is of sufficient quality:
     Quantity of bacteria: More is generally better. Typically I look for 25
     billion to 50 billion minimum if trying to correct a medical issue.
     Number of individual strains: Again, more is better. We know that
     bacteria work in “guilds” or teams, so it’s better to have a diverse team than
     to pretend these bacteria work in isolation. Now, which bacteria you need
     for a specific disease are to be determined, but until then we know that
     multistrain probiotics tend to outperform single-strain probiotics.
     Guaranteed quantity at expiration: The packaging should define not just
     how many bacteria there are at the time of manufacture, but how many are
     guaranteed by a defined expiration date. This is a marker of probiotic
     quality and, if absent, raises concerns.
     Allergen free: I prefer my probiotic to be free of dairy, eggs, nuts, seafood,
     soy, wheat, and gluten. While we’re on the topic, I personally want my
     probiotic to be vegan. This ensures that it’s not dairy based, which many of
     the probiotics on the market are.
     Delayed-release capsule: We need to get the probiotics to the area in your
     body where the bacteria actually live, which is in the colon. Without a
     special delayed-release capsule, many of them will be destroyed by your
     stomach acid.
     Packaging and need for refrigeration: Let me say this: I generally
     refrigerate anyway. But it’s a sign of improved survivability of the probiotic
     if it does not require refrigeration. I love my probiotics in blister packs,
     which means that each individual capsule is protected from bacteria-
     damaging humidity.


When will the future of probiotics arrive?
Knowing which bacterial strains to combine in our probiotics is the challenge.
Again, we know that microbes function as teams, or “guilds.” We need to figure
out how to build the proper team to accomplish our specific goal. It’s an
incredibly challenging process to engineer because we’re talking about
measuring hundreds of species, which dynamically change by the millisecond,
differ by anatomical geography, and interact with each other and their
environment. But the probiotic engineered by nature over three million years
already contains those guilds and that balance. Yes, I’m talking about POOP!
We disrespect and overlook it, but it may be the savior of modern medicine.
There are dozens of active clinical trials evaluating the role of fecal transplant in
human health. My prediction is that fecal transplant will be more effective for
acute illnesses (like infection) than for chronic illnesses (like colitis or Crohn’s
disease) and that concurrent lifestyle changes are needed to support the newly
received microbiota. I’m excited to see what the studies find!




To view the 35+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                                8
The Fiber Fueled Foods
      Inspiring your gut microbes to do the Riverdance at every meal




You may have noticed that our food culture is obsessed with “superfoods.”
We’re all looking for that one game changer that’s going to fix all of our health
problems and make us feel like a million bucks. We’re encouraged to reach for
pills we can pop to make everything better. Minimal effort with maximum
results. Don’t get me wrong, superfoods (and medications, when you need them)
are great. But we got it a little twisted because no one food is capable of meeting
that expectation. There aren’t three hundred thousand plants on Earth so that we
could pick just one and gorge ourselves on it.
   There’s no perfect food—they all have strengths and weaknesses. I’m the first
to admit that there are weaknesses to the healthy foods I’m promoting in this
book. It goes back to our conversation from Chapter 4. Too much of a good
thing can hurt you. If all you ate was kale, you would be incredibly unhealthy.
   When we focus on superfoods alone, we miss out on diversity of plants.
Superfoods are cool, but I will take plant-based diversity over superfoods every
day of the week.
   Remember that food is not just a bunch of individual components, it’s an
entire package. Do the benefits outweigh the negatives? Bring food into your life
that’s more positive than negative. When we do that, we get the best from our
diet. That’s where plant-based diversity comes in—each plant might not be
individually perfect, but the positives far outweigh the negatives, and when you
consider them collectively you have a diet perfectly tailored to support a healthy
gut microbiota and overall health.
   That said, we can focus on diversity of plants and at the same time incorporate
foods that are true nutritional powerhouses to get the best of both those worlds.
These turbocharged foods can be our “best friends,” but they shouldn’t be our
only friends.
   Here are my favorite Fiber Fueled foods, conveniently organized into an
acronym to make them easy to remember. These are the foods I try to sneak in as
often as possible, but they are most powerful in combination and when you eat
them with more plant varieties.


     F GOALS


     F: Fruit & Fermented
     G: Greens & Grains
     O: Omega-3 Super Seeds
     A: Aromatics (onions, garlic)
     L: Legumes
     S: Sulforaphane (broccoli sprouts and other cruciferous veggies)

F: Fruit & Fermented
In Chapter 6, we celebrated fermented foods for their increased nutritional value,
prebiotics, probiotics, and enrichment with postbiotics. They also add further
plant-based diversity to our diet. Remember that our goal is to add a small
serving of fermented foods to our daily routine.
   But there’s a second “F” in our F GOALS and that’s fruit. There’s an
inordinate amount of fear of fruit out there, particularly in the fitness community
where I’ve seen or heard many personal trainers say, “Fruit has sugar, and
excess sugar can lead to weight gain.” Folks, we shouldn’t look at any food only
through the lens of its individual components because it will cause us to make
conclusions that are flat-out wrong. We need to look at whole foods. The sugar
in fruit is by no means the same as processed sugar. It’s packed in with
everything else in the fruit, including vitamins and minerals, phytochemicals,
and fiber.
   And no, eating whole fruit does not cause “weight gain.” It’s actually quite the
opposite. It doesn’t cause diabetes, either, for that matter. Instead, it actually can
protect against it. For example, as sweet as berries may be, they actually lower
blood sugar and insulin release after a meal. Whether you are diabetic or looking
to avoid sugar for another reason, don’t make the mistake of lumping natural
sugar in whole fruit in with added or processed sugars. You absolutely should be
eating fruit! It can help you lose weight and control your diabetes.


     What about juicing?
          Is juiced fruit the same as sinking your teeth into the whole food? No, unfortunately, it’s not.
          When you process your food, the rules no longer apply. When you juice your fruit, you are
          removing most of the fiber and artificially concentrating the sugar. For example, one small
          orange has 45 calories, 2.3 grams of fiber, and 9 grams of sugars. One cup of OJ packs in 134
          calories, just 0.5 gram of fiber, and 23.3 grams of sugars. Fruit juice is a sugar beverage,
          created by the manipulation of a whole food.



   I could write an entire book about the health benefits you’ll find in fruit. In
Chapter 4 we learned that apples are an excellent source of prebiotic fiber,
healthy microbes, and numerous beneficial polyphenol phytochemicals
contributing to reduced risk of heart disease, stroke, lung cancer, diabetes,
asthma, and weight loss. Oranges have vitamin C and antioxidant flavonoids and
anthocyanins that protect against hypertension, high cholesterol, kidney stones,
and iron deficiency. Nice, right?
   So apples and oranges are great, but let me tell you about my deep and abiding
love for berries: blueberries, blackberries, raspberries, strawberries, and the
lesser known acai and goji berries. Give me all of them!
   Berries come in incredible colors: blue, purple, red, and pink. The color
actually comes from a phytochemical (remember, “phyto” means “plant-based”)
called anthocyanins. Without anthocyanins, blueberries would be green! That’s
why immature blueberries aren’t blue, because the anthocyanins haven’t come in
yet. Anthocyanins are pretty magical. They help protect against cancer, and they
also boost cognition. For example, in one study women who ate just two
servings of strawberries or one serving of blueberries per week postponed
cognitive decline and made their brain behave like it was thirty months younger.
In another study, two servings of berries a week yielded a 23 percent less chance
of developing Parkinson’s. And when wild blueberries were given to kids, they
saw almost immediate improvements in cognitive performance that increased
based upon the dose of blueberries. I recently took a grueling eight-hour exam to
renew my board certification in internal medicine. Guess what I was eating all
day? Blueberries.
                                    Pro Tip: Blueberries
     Opt for the smaller blueberries, ideally wild. Smaller blueberries are less sweet but have higher
                                          levels of antioxidants.



   But let’s not ignore the fiber content. In a one-cup serving of strawberries,
blueberries, blackberries, and raspberries, you’ll find 3, 4, 8, and 8 grams of
fiber in each, respectively. Considering that the average American is only getting
15 or 16 grams of fiber in a day, a simple handful of berries can make a big
difference. I love popping a couple of handfuls of berries as an afternoon snack
or when I have a sweet tooth.


G: Greens & Grains
In Chapter 4 we discussed the merits of whole grains, such as reduced risk of
coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and total cancer as well as lower
likelihood of death from all causes, respiratory diseases, infectious diseases,
diabetes, and all non-cardiovascular, non-cancer causes. That was just one study.
   It’s pretty straightforward from my perspective. Drop the refined grains, no
doubt. I’m with you 100 percent. But if you want a healthy microbiota, whole
grains are at the foundation of building a healthy gut. And the numerous studies
cited in Chapter 4 support it.
   There’s a second important “G” in the house, and that’s greens. There is so
much plant-based diversity when it comes to greens: collards, kale, arugula,
spinach, romaine, bok choy, watercress, Swiss chard, broccoli raab, mustard
greens, sorrel, escarole, kohlrabi, and more. And there are varieties within these
foods, too. For example, kale varieties include curly, lacinato (aka dinosaur or
Tuscan kale), Redbor, or Siberian. Even the leaves of some favorite root veggies
like beet, turnip, dandelion, radish, and carrots are edible and offer more variety
in the green category.
   When we assess the health benefits of food, nutrient density is a key concept.
The idea is to get the maximum amount of nutrients—vitamins, minerals,
phytochemicals, fiber—per calorie consumed. This becomes a simple formula:
nutrient density equals nutrients divided by calories. So if you think about oil,
for example, it’s high in calories and low in nutrients. Poor nutrient density. Or
potato chips. High in calories, low in nutrients. This is a pretty straightforward,
logical approach, right?
   We call it the ANDI score, which stands for Aggregate Nutrient Density Index
and was developed by the legendary Dr. Joel Fuhrman, one of my personal
health heroes. The score is from 1 to 1,000, with 1 being the worst. For example,
cola, corn chips, and vanilla ice cream got the lowest score. Sounds about right.
As for the high performers, there were five with a perfect 1,000 score—kale,
collards, mustard greens, watercress, and Swiss chard. Bok choy, spinach,
arugula, and romaine were the next four highest scores. In other words, greens
were the top nine foods on the list. This wasn’t a list restricted to just greens. All
foods were eligible, yet greens hold a monopoly at the top.
   The absurd amount of nutrient density in greens is a present from Mother
Nature. You get tons of nutrients packaged with almost no calories, so you can
literally eat as much as you want. It’s getting your nutrients served without the
calories! For example, an entire pound of leafy greens has only 100 calories.
That’s about one egg or two bites of steak. I’ve stopped worrying about portion
size ever since I transitioned to a plant-based diet, but if you do continue to
consume high-calorie foods after reading this book, know that you can throw
unlimited amounts of greens in there to get more nutrients in your diet without
compromising calories.
   Let’s highlight a few examples of this nutrient density hard at work:


                Kale: Kale contains antioxidant phytochemicals lutein and
                zeaxanthin, which are required by the eyes to prevent macular
                degeneration. It also contains beta-carotene, which reduces the
                risk of getting cataracts.
                Collard greens: You can’t live in Charleston, South Carolina,
                and not love collard greens. But what’s beautiful is that they can
                sneak nutrients in on even the most unsuspecting Southern palate.
                Turns out that collards bind bile acids in the intestines and
                eliminate them in our stool. This helps to lower cholesterol and
                reduces carcinogenic secondary bile acids.


                                      Pro Tip: Greens
       Steam your greens to improve bile salt–binding activity! This helps protect against cancer,
                                 specifically colon and liver cancer.




                Spinach: You may recall that Popeye got his superhuman
                strength by popping a can of spinach. Popeye was created in
                1929, so this was incredibly forward-thinking. And it’s true! Just
                one cup of cooked spinach offers 36 percent of your daily value
               for iron and 11 percent for protein, not to mention a bonus of
               vitamins A and K, calcium, magnesium, potassium, and
               manganese. Oh, and 4 grams of fiber.
               Arugula: Arugula is a cancer destroyer. It has a unique mix of
               phytochemicals like thiocyanates, sulforaphane, and indoles that
               may help fight some of our most deadly cancers—prostate,
               breast, colon, ovarian, and cervical. We’ll come back to
               sulforaphane in a minute.
               Bok choy: Bok choy is great for your bones, offering critical
               minerals like iron, zinc, and magnesium in combination with
               vitamin K.
               Romaine: If you’re looking for healthy skin and to reverse aging,
               grab some romaine. The vitamins A and C in romaine help to lay
               down fresh collagen to prevent wrinkles and neutralize oxidizing
               free radicals. The result is glowing, radiant skin with improved
               elasticity.


O: Omega-3 Super Seeds
I absolutely adore this category because I feel like these foods have it all—they
are nutritious, delicious, versatile, and unique. But before I jump in, a few words
on omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. You’ve heard of different fat types: trans,
saturated, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated. These omega-3 and -6 fats are
polyunsaturated fats, and they’re considered “essential” because our body is not
capable of intrinsically making them so we are required to get them from our
diet. If you don’t consume them, you develop a deficiency, which can lead to
sickness.
   Generally speaking, polyunsaturated fats are considered healthy and are
important for many functions in the body. But you’ve probably heard about
omega-3s more than omega-6s. Part of the reason why you’ve heard so much
about omega-3s is that the modern Western diet provides an excessive amount of
omega-6s and an inadequate amount of omega-3s. The ratio of omega-6s to
omega-3s is a marker of health. Traditional cultures are thought to have evolved
with a nearly even mix between omega-6s and omega-3s, while most Westerners
are functioning with a ratio between 15 and 16.7 to 1 of excess omega-6s. It’s a
ratio that when skewed can promote disease: cardiovascular disease, cancer,
osteoporosis, and autoimmune diseases. Our goal is to balance this ratio, which
means that we need an influx of omega-3s in our diet.
   And I know just where we can find them—omega-3 super seeds. To be
specific, I’m referring to three types of seeds that contain plant-based omega-3s:
flaxseeds, chia seeds, and hemp seeds. While each offers the omega-3s, there are
differences between each so let’s break it down a little bit.


                 Flaxseed: Flaxseeds are an excellent source of omega-3 alpha-
                 linolenic acid (ALA), with 2,300 milligrams of ALA per
                 tablespoon of flax. But it is also an excellent source of soluble
                 fiber, which is part of the reason why it’s a traditional remedy for
                 constipation. You get all the goodness that comes with prebiotic
                 fiber as discussed in Chapter 3. Flax is also particularly rich in
                 lignans, which are plant chemicals that strongly protect against
                 hormonal cancers like breast and prostate cancer.


                                     Pro Tip: Flaxseed
        Flaxseeds have a hard shell and must be ground or thoroughly chewed in order for their
     nutrients to be absorbed. If you buy pre-ground flax, simply keep it in your freezer to maintain
                                                freshness.




                 Chia seeds: You’ll find lignans in chia seeds as well, though the
                 levels are higher in flax. Chia has ever so slightly more omega-3s
                 (2,400 vs. 2,300 milligrams per tablespoon) and significantly
                 more fiber (5 grams in chia vs. 3 grams in flax). Chia seeds are 40
                 percent fiber by weight, making them one of the top sources of
                 fiber in the world. This is mostly soluble fiber, which is the
                 prebiotic kind. You can see the soluble fiber on display if you stir
                 a tablespoon of chia into a quarter cup of liquid and within ten
                 minutes you’ll find a viscous gel. Chia seeds can absorb ten to
                 twelve times their weight in water. Let them sit in water for a few
                 hours and you’ll make chia pudding, which is nutritious and has a
                 texture resembling tapioca pudding.
                 Hemp seeds: Last but not least are hemp seeds. They’re, ahem,
                 different from flax and chia. Okay, let me just get this out of the
                 way. Yes, hemp seeds come from the same plant as marijuana.
                 But they’re legal! They don’t contain THC, the psychoactive part
                 of cannabis. So they won’t get you high, but they will get you
                 healthy. Hemps seeds have about 40 percent of the omega-3 ALA
                 that you find in chia and flax, but less fiber. When you think of
                 hemp seeds, think of protein. Hemp seeds are unique in that they
                 are complete protein, meaning they contain all of the essential
                 amino acids. So hemp seeds are a one-stop shop for both essential
                 fats and amino acids.


                                                ■

I love throwing omega-3 super seeds in my smoothie. Honestly, I’ll often put all
three in at the same time. They go well with oatmeal or in some cases on a fresh
salad. And you’ll find a mouthwatering recipe for chia pudding (Zesty Lemon
Chia Pudding) in Chapter 10, “The Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks.”
   There are a few other sources of plant-based omega-3s to be aware of—
walnuts, firm tofu, and edamame have a decent amount of ALA, although much
less than flax or chia. Beans and Brussels sprouts have a small amount, as well.


A: Aromatics (Onions, Garlic)
These are the flavor foods! Think of a heavenly, slow-simmered Italian sauce
heavily laden with garlic, onions, and basil.


                                 Always add fresh herbs
     Herbs are incredibly nutrient-dense. Basil alone has numerous phytochemicals, giving it anti-
        inflammatory, chemo-preventive, radio-protective, antimicrobial, analgesic, antipyretic,
     antidiabetic, hepatoprotective, hypolipidemic, and immunomodulatory properties. Here’s my
     point: Any time you have the opportunity to add fresh herbs and spices to a dish, do it! You’re
                   adding flavor, plant-based diversity, and multiple phytochemicals.



   The great flavor that you get with onions and garlic is because they’re both
allium vegetables. Others in this category with similar benefits are leeks,
shallots, chives, and scallions. At baseline, allium vegetables are jam-packed
with nutrients: vitamins B1, B2, B3, B6, C, E, K, folate, iron, magnesium,
phosphorus, sodium, and zinc. Jam. Packed.
   But then we get into the really good stuff. Allium contains aromatic
organosulfur compounds that are responsible for their smell, their taste, and their
health benefits. For example, when fresh garlic or onions are chopped or
crushed, an enzyme called alliinase is activated and converts alliin into allicin. It
takes ten minutes for the enzyme to activate the allicin, a compound that has
antibacterial, antifungal, antiparasitic, and even antiviral properties. The stronger
the smell, the better it is for your health. To allow allicin to activate, CHOP, then
STOP and wait for ten minutes before cooking with alliums. The allicin appears
to target the bad guys like multidrug-resistant enterotoxigenic E. coli and
Candida albicans. And it promotes the growth of Bifidobacteria and other
healthy microbes in the gut. It’s worth noting that alliums are also an excellent
source of prebiotic fiber.


        Garlic: my secret weapon in the fight against the common cold
      In our family we have a tradition of using garlic to fight the common cold. At the first sign of a
     sore throat, we start ingesting garlic. Basically, we will cut two to four garlic cloves into pill-size
          pieces. CHOP then STOP. Wait ten minutes for the alliinase to activate the allicin, then
         swallow whole. I’ll do this daily until the cold is gone, and I’ve actually reversed colds by
       consuming the garlic pieces when I just start to feel symptoms. There’s a placebo controlled
        trial that supports my experience. But you do smell a little like garlic while you’re talking.
                                              Small price to pay.



   Allium veggies also have potent anticancer activity, particularly against
gastric and prostate cancer. There are two layers to the anticancer activity. First,
the organosulfur compounds like allicin detoxify carcinogens, block tumor
growth, and prevent blood flow to the tumor. Second, allium veggies contain at
least twenty-four different flavonoid phytochemicals, such as quercetin. Red
onions have the added benefit of anthocyanidins. The flavonoids have anti-
inflammatory effects that may help protect us from cancer.
   These antioxidant compounds also appear to be beneficial for Alzheimer’s
dementia and heart disease.


                                         Pro Tip: Onions
      When you chop an onion, you set off a reaction creating the organosulfides that makes your
       eyes tear. These are the cancer-fighting and anti-inflammatory compounds, so we embrace
       them. If you tear up when cutting your onion, try throwing the onion in the freezer for five
      minutes to make it cold before cutting. To get the most out of your allium veggies, it’s ideal to
        eat them raw but if not, cut them and let them sit to form the compounds before cooking.
                                          (CHOP, then STOP.)




L: Legumes
Legumes are among the healthiest foods on the planet. And they are dirt cheap!
They are at the foundation of a healthy gut microbiota, offering prebiotic fiber
and resistant starches in spades. Please don’t pass up the opportunity to build
your gut on these irreplaceable foods. See Chapter 4 for more information on
legumes.


S: Sulforaphane (Broccoli Sprouts and Other Cruciferous Veggies)
Plants are like my children. I love all of them, and I can see the beauty in their
individuality. But if there’s one I love the most, this is the one. I have been
waiting eight chapters to talk to you about cruciferous vegetables and their super
chemical sulforaphane.
   We all know broccoli, kale, arugula, cabbage, cauliflower, and Brussels
sprouts as healthy foods. But what’s so special about them? They’re part of a
family of vegetables that we refer to as cruciferous. There are at least forty
family members, but they share a common lineage. Through billions of years of
plant evolution, they evolved a common defense system using an enzyme called
myrosinase to convert glucosinolates into “toxic” compounds. The myrosinase
and glucosinolates are stored in separate compartments within the plant, so under
normal circumstances they don’t mix. But when an insect or invading herbivore
—like yours truly—starts mashing on the plant, they’ll break the separating
chambers, mix the chemicals, and set off a chemical reaction leading to the
production of isothiocyanates (ITCs) like sulforaphane. It’s conceptually similar
to a bomb. So what happens when the bomb goes off and these ITCs are
released? Cancer is cured, inflammation is squashed, hearts get healthy, blood
sugar comes down, fat gets burned, and hormones get balanced. ITCs are
powerfully health promoting. This is yet another example where a plant’s
defense mechanism can also do double duty as our defense against cancer cells.


                           Pro Tip: Cruciferous Vegetables
      Cruciferous veggies are similar to onions and garlic in that they have an enzyme that needs to
      be activated to get the most healing benefits and therefore are best consumed raw. Similar to
     the aromatics, you can employ the CHOP then STOP technique to activate the enzyme prior to
        cooking or eating. If the broccoli or cauliflower has already been cooked, as happens with
      frozen vegetables that have been heat blanched prior to freezing, you can replace some of the
     enzyme that has been lost and restore the healing isothiocyanate phytochemicals by sprinkling
                   mustard seed powder on the vegetables after cooking. A cool trick!



  Let’s talk about my favorite isothiocyanate—sulforaphane. You get
sulforaphane from cruciferous vegetables like broccoli, Brussels sprouts, kale,
and cabbage. In 1992, Dr. Paul Talalay, a true pioneer in the field of cancer
prevention, opened Pandora’s box when he first published on the cancer
protective effects of sulforaphane. Since that time there have been hundreds of
laboratory, animal, and some human studies (many by Dr. Talalay himself, who
recently passed away at age ninety-five) suggesting that sulforaphane may be the
driving force behind these incredibly healthy foods. Here’s what we have
learned about sulforaphane, this medicinal phytochemical:


              Protects us from cancer by seven mechanisms: inhibits the
              production of carcinogens, activates enzymes to detoxify the
              carcinogens that are produced, shuts down blood flow to the
              tumor (which is needed to fuel growth), inhibits cancer cell
              migration and invasion, promotes self-destruction of cancer cells
              (apoptosis), and even regulates cancer development through
              epigenetics.
              Undermines lung, colon, breast, prostate, skin, pancreatic, liver,
              throat, and bladder cancer, osteosarcoma, glioblastoma, leukemia,
              melanoma—and potentially more.
              Shuts down the pro-inflammatory pathways that get activated by
              bacterial endotoxin.
              Works as a powerful antioxidant to detoxify free radicals and
              reduce cellular damage.
              May benefit Parkinson’s, and recovery from stroke, concussion,
              or other brain trauma.
              Reduces amyloid beta plaques and improves cognitive
              impairment in Alzheimer’s patients.
              Improves mood, as well as anxiety and depression.
              Boosts brain function, improving memory and focus.
              Regulates the immune system, ameliorating autoimmune diseases
              like experimental multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
              Flips the body into fat-burning mode to promote weight loss,
              amazingly by reducing pathogenic bad bacteria in the gut and
              limiting bacterial endotoxin release in addition to other
              mechanisms.
              Combats bacterial and fungal infections. In one study, twenty-
              three out of twenty-eight pathogenic bacterial and fungal species
              were inhibited.
              Protects the heart by improving lipids, lowering blood pressure,
               inhibiting platelet aggregation, and even directly suppressing
               inflammation in the arteries.
               Improves insulin sensitivity to correct type 2 diabetes.
               Repairs the damage of diabetes, correcting diabetic heart and
               kidney damage.
               Protects the liver and kidneys from the damage done by some
               chemotherapeutic drugs.


   Believe it or not, I could keep going. So how does sulforaphane interact with
our gut microbiota? We saw above that sulforaphane is capable of reducing
levels of pathogenic bacteria and bacterial endotoxin release. But there’s so
much more. In another study, sulforaphane corrected gut dysbiosis by increasing
healthy gut microbes, increasing butyrate release, and repairing the intestinal
lining to reverse leaky gut by upregulating tight junction formation. Mind.
Blown. What I’m saying here is that part of the way sulforaphane works its
absolute magic is by tag teaming with SCFAs to create the most powerful gut-
healing superhero duo of all time.
   It’s all about the cruciferous veggies, specifically broccoli, Brussels sprouts,
cabbage, cauliflower, and kale. But there is one food that dominates all others in
terms of offering more sulforaphane: broccoli sprouts. These are essentially
immature broccoli, where the seed has just recently hatched and we have the
earliest thing beyond a seed. The concept is the same as bean sprouts or alfalfa
sprouts. Broccoli sprouts can produce ten to one hundred times more
sulforaphane than mature broccoli. What this means is that you can either eat
massive quantities of fully mature broccoli or a small amount of broccoli sprouts
and achieve the same effect.


     Grow your own broccoli sprouts! It’s easy.
               Add 2 tablespoons of broccoli sprouting seeds to a wide-mouthed 1-quart mason jar.
               Cover with 2 inches of filtered water and cap with a sprouting lid. Store in a warm, dark
               place, like the kitchen cabinet, overnight. In the morning you’re going to drain the
               water. This is the only time you’re going to leave the seeds submerged in water. From
               here on out it’ll be rinse and drain.
               Rinse the seeds with fresh water two or three times per day. Swirl, then drain the water.
               It’s important to get most of the water out, so one strategy is to place the mason jar
               upside down in a large bowl so that it’s at a 45-degree angle (or so) so the drops can
               continue to fall out. Again, this is the process you’re repeating two or three times daily
                —rinse, swirl, drain, rest in the cabinet, repeat.

             Over the course of days you will see changes: first they break open and grow (so cute!),
          then they extend to be an inch or so long with yellow leaves. At this point, it’s time for them to
          get some sunlight. Sunlight will help them mature, the leaves will turn green, and you are
          done! Cover them with an airtight seal and store in the fridge.



   Broccoli sprouts have a bitter, peppery flavor, but it’s that bitterness that is
blasting cancer cells on your behalf. And note: Taking a supplement instead just
can’t match the effect of the broccoli sprouts. In a study comparing broccoli
sprouts to a supplement, the real thing dominated. Whole foods win, yet again! If
the taste bothers you, try using broccoli sprouts in a smoothie, soup, or larger
salad.


Bonus: Shrooms & Seaweed
I’m pretty sure you now understand why sulforaphane deserved its own
category. Honestly, there may be no single food that represents the idea of “Food
Is Medicine” better than broccoli sprouts. But mushrooms and seaweed deserve
a quick shout-out as a bonus category.
   Shrooms deserve mention because they are entirely unique—they’re not even
plants! They’re fungi, but let’s make them honorary plants because they sure
behave as such. They contain prebiotic beta-glucan, which strengthens the
immune system to prevent infections and even cancer. Several types even offer
unique protection against breast cancer. Eating one button mushroom per day is
associated with a 64 percent reduction in breast cancer risk. One beautiful thing
about mushrooms is the variety: white, cremini, oyster, portobello, maitake,
reishi, cordyceps. Each offers its own unique blend of health benefits. So in
addition to plant-based diversity, I advocate for toadstool diversity!


                                    Pro Tip: Mushrooms
     Make sure to cook your mushrooms. Several types contain a substance called agaritine, which
                   is potentially carcinogenic but significantly reduced by cooking.



   Seaweed deserves a little more respect. It’s not a weed, it’s a vegetable. It just
so happens to come from the ocean. And what’s cool is if we’re talking about
plant-based diversity, seaweed is a fantastic way to add it because, not only is it
high in fiber, but it actually has several unique types of fiber that you won’t find
in terrestrial plants—ulvans, xylans, agars. Naturally, these are prebiotic fibers.
Brown algae, such as kelp or wakame, contain a unique compound called
fucoxanthin that helps reduce the accumulation of fats, promotes weight loss,
improves insulin sensitivity, and improves blood lipid profiles. Sea veggies are
also an excellent source of iodine for thyroid health and vitamin B12.
   Since sea veggies and algae aren’t a traditional part of the American diet, you
may be at a loss for where to start with them. No worries. Let’s do a quick little
run-through of some options and how to incorporate them.


                Nori: These are the crisp sheets that can be softened to make
                sushi rolls. They’re a lightweight, nutritious snack as is, but can
                also be broken into “flakes” and sprinkled on your salad for some
                added crunch.
                Kelp/Kombu: Generally sold in dried strips and “meaty”
                versions, kelp adds a nice umami flavor to savory soups, like the
                Biome Broth you’ll find in Chapter 10, “The Fiber Fueled 4
                Weeks.” The Japanese even drink kombu tea.
                Wakame: A delicate, lightly sweet seaweed that makes a nice
                addition to miso soup, or combine it with crunchy veggies like
                cucumber to make a delicious seaweed salad.
                Spirulina: A nutrient-dense blue-green algae found in powder or
                tablet form that’s very high in iron, calcium, protein, B vitamins,
                and chlorophyll. Sprinkle it into your smoothies and enjoy its
                deep color.


     Public service announcement: Make sure your F
     GOALS foods are organic!
          F GOALS plants are thin-skinned foods. There’s no rind or skin to peel away, with the
          exception of onions and garlic. So any chemical that’s sprayed on it is a part of it, and you
          can’t guarantee that you can wash it off. In a prospective cohort study of more than sixty-eight
          thousand French volunteers, people who ate organic food had a lower overall risk of cancer,
          non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and postmenopausal breast cancer. More studies are sure to come,
          but when considering the addition of industrial chemicals to our food, I think our base position
          should be one of protection—we should assume that pesticides are poison until proven
          otherwise.
Adding F GOALS to your daily routine
Okay, so we have our list of foundational foods and now it’s time to shift our
eating. Be conscious of the fiber and FODMAP content on the F GOALS list.
It’s no coincidence that these are high-fiber, high FODMAP foods. As we’ve
discussed, FODMAPs aren’t the enemy, they’re our friend. But whenever we’re
adding in fiber and FODMAPs, we want to go low and slow to grow—that’s the
motto.




To view the 60+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
PART III
           THE FIBER FUELED PLAN
                                                                                   9
Fiber Fueled 365: The Lifestyle
    Building healthy habits that lead to effortless fitness and thriving




We’ve finally arrived! I’m excited to share the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks plan with
you. But first, let me say that Fiber Fueled is not a diet. It’s a lifestyle. It is a
transformation into the life you deserve, where you restore your health and feel
amazing and confident. Take a moment, put this book down, and think about
how that transformation looks for you.
   It’s a beautiful picture, isn’t it? Hippocrates, the founder of Western medicine,
gave us the adage, “Let your food be your medicine, and your medicine be your
food.” This idea is central to the Fiber Fueled program, but just as important are
the healthy lifestyle habits. We’ll talk about these later in this chapter: sleep,
exercise, time with loved ones, time with yourself, and more. These can be your
medicine, too.
   When you build the “right routine” then healing just happens. You’re living a
life that heals, restores, and strengthens you. And it’s effortless. But to get there,
we have to get into the right frame of mind.



It all starts with a “health mindset”
We are not born with skills that are forever locked in place, incapable of being
modified. No one is born to be a professional singer or basketball player, as
much as it may seem like that sometimes (hi, Beyoncé and LeBron)—we all
have the ability to grow and get better no matter who we are. Rather than
believing, “I can’t do that,” if you apply yourself and get really invested in
working toward your goal, you can and will develop new skills and change your
life. It’s called having a “growth mindset.”
   The growth mindset is not about who we are but what we are capable of
becoming. You are capable of change. The idea of a “growth mindset” was first
introduced in Dr. Carol Dweck’s book Mindset: The New Psychology of Success.
It allows you to acknowledge that you have strengths and weaknesses, but that
you should celebrate weaknesses as opportunities for growth. With our growth
mindset, we choose not to overly emphasize “success” or “skill” or “perfection.”
We honor effort, learning, and persistence.
   My wife and I have been talking about this “growth mindset” since our first
child was born. We wanted to create values in our family that embraced
perseverance and hard work, not for winning, but for setting a goal to see what
you’re capable of and what you can make yourself do. We feel strongly that it’s
a healthy outlook for life.
   So I had this awareness already spun into my soul, and when I became
motivated to do better with my own health, I started to apply the same concept. I
developed a health mindset. I wasn’t interested in the pressure of a rigid plan to
eat healthy, and I didn’t want to go through a painful process of denying myself
food through dieting. I wasn’t down for shaming and blaming myself for my
unhealthy ways or love for fast food. It was time to move forward, but on my
own terms.
   It wasn’t always easy for me and I know it won’t always be easy for you. Let
me be honest. I loved my old diet. I didn’t love the way it made me feel, but for
about three minutes, it was blissful to dig into a Philly cheesesteak or a chili
cheese hot dog. I literally was drinking a two-liter bottle of soda almost every
day, trying to compensate for the hangover I had after each meal with caffeine. I
probably should have been sponsored by Red Bull because they were a regular
part of my life; sometimes I had two or three in the same day. And it never hit
me that maybe, just maybe, it was my lifestyle that was making me feel like crap
and also the reason I couldn’t lose weight, even though I was lifting weights for
forty-five minutes, then jumping on the treadmill for a 5K or 10K or diving into
the pool for a hundred laps.
   I wanted to get back to having a healthy relationship with my food in the quest
to better myself. I decided to embrace my own starting point and orient my
choices toward better health. Every meal became an opportunity to do a little
better. And when I slipped up, no worries. I’d try to do better next time. I
enjoyed the challenge of seeing what I could do to take care of myself, and the
opportunity to learn and grow from it.
   It started with little changes. Saying yes to Brussels sprouts. Subbing in a
glass of water or kombucha for Coca-Cola Classic or Diet Mountain Dew.
Making a delicious smoothie at home rather than stopping at Hardee’s to grab a
chili cheese dog and burger. No late-night snacks. Dropping the artificial
sweeteners and creamer from my coffee. Skipping the french fries sometimes for
a side salad to get some green stuff on my plate. I didn’t feel deprived or
obligated. I was making the choice, and I was choosing better health.
   One of the most exciting things I learned on my personal journey is that as I
started to make these changes, I found my taste buds came along for the ride.
Food that didn’t seem appealing to me at first slowly became what I craved. You
know that feeling when you return home after travel and you find yourself
craving your favorite local meal? For me back in the day that was Jersey Mike’s
for a cheesesteak or Five Guys for a burger and fries. One day I got home and
noticed I was dying for something else—my first stop was to my local salad joint
where I grabbed a salad and a kombucha. Look, even to me it still seems weird
to say that. I never thought I would crave a salad. But when this started
happening to me, I knew something had changed.
   The ultimate test came after I’d cleaned up my diet for a few years. I was in
medical practice and I had the worst week ever. I was in the hospital by five in
the morning every day, and from the moment I walked in the door, I was flying
by the seat of my pants trying to get my work done. New consults kept coming
in and the number of sick patients I was caring for kept increasing to the point
where I was literally running between patients in order to see them all. Plenty of
nights I would get stuck in the hospital after hours. Not like, “Hey, I got done at
seven-thirty last night.” No, this was more like I was lucky if I’d get home by
10:00 p.m. Most nights it would be even later. And it’s hard to describe what it
does to your morale when you work like that; you hate your job, you hate
yourself for taking the job, but what you hate the most is that you haven’t seen
your wife or newborn daughter awake all week. You get home and they’re
asleep, then you sneak out in the morning before they get up.
   So when the week from hell was over, I said to myself, “You know what . . .
you deserve to treat yourself.” At this point I was no longer eating red meat. I
hadn’t had a steak in nearly two years. But once upon a time, when I was chief
resident at Northwestern in Chicago, good gracious did I love me a rib eye. So I
decided to treat myself to what used to be one of my favorite steak houses. I sat
at the bar and ordered a rib eye. Medium rare—that’s the way I always liked it.
   When the steak came out, though, I didn’t start salivating when I smelled it. In
fact, something smelled off. And when I took a bite, I knew something definitely
was off. It didn’t taste the way I remembered. It’s not that I felt guilty; heck, I
felt like I deserved this reward. It wasn’t an ethical thing. I was hungry and I was
treating myself. I finished two bites and realized I just didn’t want it. I covered it
up with my napkin and asked for the bill. I paid the bill and got out of there as
quickly as possible before they could question why I didn’t like it.
   There was nothing wrong with the steak itself. The only thing that had
changed were my taste buds. I haven’t had a steak since. I have no desire to
when it comes to flavor. I had transformed my diet and developed the principles
you find in this book by using them in my own life first. I was as happy as I’d
ever been, and I wasn’t restricting my food intake at all. If I was hungry, I would
eat. But I could tell that things had changed for me.
   One day I jumped on the scale at work, the same one we use to weigh our
patients at each office visit. I’d been between 235 and 240 back in the day, but
it’d been years since I actually weighed myself. And as I slid the weights on the
scale to find that balance, a smile came across my face. I was down to 190,
which is what I weighed in college. Behold the power of plants! And small
choices!
   Small choices yield huge results, especially as you start to develop more
consistency in those small choices. But here’s the thing: It’s not meant to be a
burden. It’s about empowering you with a health mindset as your compass
toward a better life. It’s not about absolutes or being perfect. It’s not meant to
make you feel guilty when you grab the fries and soda. Absolutely not. Adopting
a health mindset means finding the positives and celebrating progress rather than
flogging ourselves for moments of weakness or imperfection. We all have those
moments—myself included! But don’t let them make you give up.
   If your taste buds aren’t quite there yet, don’t worry. You’ll get there just like
I did. As your microbiome changes, so will your taste buds. The changes that
you make to your diet over time will change the core of your microbiome—
remember how adaptable it is?—and ultimately your taste will evolve with it.
Trust me; these foods that you don’t think you have a taste for now are going to
be your new obsession!
   Even better news is that you don’t have to wait for your microbiome to shift
by torturing yourself or pretending you need to eat food that you don’t like.
Remember, you have three hundred thousand edible plants to choose from! It’s
not just diversity of plants, either—there’s diversity of flavors, too. All herbs and
spices are plants and most flavors from around the world are inspired by plants,
so Mexican, Italian, Greek, Thai, Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, Ethiopian, and
more are all fair game. There are so many ways to eat plants: soups, salads,
smoothies, sandwiches, stews, and more. Those are just the S’s. We haven’t
even talked about noodles, tacos, pita wraps, rice bowls . . . the list goes on.
   We each have our own starting point. And while the tools in this book can
help everyone on their journey, the end point will look different for each person.
What I’m about is progress. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
the average American gets just 11 percent of their calories from whole grains,
beans, fruits, vegetables, seeds, and nuts. That’s average. In other words, if
you’re reading this book and you get 5 percent of your calories from plants,
you’re actually pretty darn close to the average. And you have the most room to
benefit from small changes. If you move that needle from 5 to 30 percent, you
can improve your health. Then watch those small changes add up.



Strive for 90 percent
I don’t want you to feel burdened by the lifestyle changes I’m suggesting—I
want you to feel excited about the possibility you have for growth! But it’s good
to have a goal. Otherwise you may just be wandering around aimlessly eating
blueberries and hoping for the best. So let’s strive toward becoming 90 percent
plant-based. Not necessarily today, but that’s our big-picture goal. Why 90
percent? Well, this is what we see in the Blue Zones population—they are 90
percent plant-based, so we know it’s a diet that will give you enormous health
benefits. Plus, having a little leniency helps avoid the pressure of being
“perfect.” That 10 percent is your sandbox. You get to make what you want of it.
Whatever your vice, it can fit into your 10 percent flex account so you don’t
have to feel guilty about it.
   Let’s be clear on what constitutes 90 percent here. I’m talking about whole
plant foods. Things you can actually grow in soil. Things that don’t come in
boxes or special packages. Things that don’t have ingredient lists because there’s
only one ingredient—a plant. Everything else falls outside the 90 percent—
processed plant foods, oil, meat, and dairy. There are plenty of vegans who
should clean up their diet. Veganism is not automatically a healthy diet just
because you’ve eliminated animal products. There are lots of unhealthy
processed plant foods out there, and lots of unhealthy vegans.


     Let’s talk about oil, folks!
          You’re all wondering, “What’s the deal with oil?” so here it is. . . . Oil is a processed food. By
          definition, it is high-calorie, low-nutrient. A pound of greens has 100 calories. A pound of oil
          has over 4,000! Olive oil is healthier than the alternative oils, and so when you opt for oil I’d
          generally recommend extra-virgin olive oil. But do you want to guess how many grams of
          fiber there are in olive oil? Zero. Same is true for all oil varietals. Zero grams of fiber, no
          matter which type or amount. We should not be striving to get more oil in our life, so that’s
          why it’s part of our 10 percent flex account.



  Make no mistake about it, I’m not encouraging you to stop at 90 percent. That
would be inconsistent with our health mindset. I honestly believe that you’re
going to feel so good as you incorporate more fresh plants into your diet that
you’re going to want more and more, and that’s going to drive you closer to 100
percent. How do I know this? Because that’s what happened with me. I came to
a point where I was close but not quite there, and I decided to give up the last
few pieces. I have to tell you, I was surprised by how much of a difference
giving up even that last small piece was. Why have something hold you back?
But at the end of the day, no matter who you are and what your matter of
perspective is, this is about challenging yourself to improve. This is about
personal growth toward a more plant-centered diet. How exactly that’s going to
look is personalized and your choice. But whether you’re 15 percent or 95
percent, if you’re moving in the right direction, then I am your biggest
cheerleader and with you 100 percent. Let’s do it together and share our
common philosophy.


When healthy habits form, effortless fitness ensues
If I asked you to close your eyes and envision what medicine looks like, what
would you come up with? Is it a pill? A doctor wearing a white coat and
reaching out with a stethoscope? Do you see yourself lying in a hospital bed,
hooked up to an IV and a nurse checking your vital signs?
   What if medicine could be you, right now . . . living, breathing, in the flesh.
Not an intervention by our reactive health care system, but instead just you
living your routine daily life.
   It’s time for us to redefine health care and acknowledge that health during our
lifetime is the sum of all of the small choices we make minute by minute, day by
day. One choice, whether good or bad, makes little to no difference in the grand
scheme of things. People don’t drop dead from having one cigarette. But if you
create consistency, a pattern, then you are amplifying that choice over the course
of time.
   We are creatures of habit. There’s just no getting away from that. That can be
problematic when we form bad habits that take a poor choice and amplify it. But
the flip side is that we can acknowledge the power in our habits to amplify our
choices, and use it to our advantage by being intentional in creating healthy
habits.
   It is these healthy habits that can allow us to just live our routine lives and yet
be promoting health and fitness. It becomes effortless because it’s just our
routine, but when our routine promotes health it’s so much more powerful than
any pill a doctor could give you. The body is designed to heal if we can just get
out of its way.
   In the coming pages you will find the lifestyle elements that contribute to a
healthy gut. Think of each of these as a small opportunity around which to build
a healthy habit. Remember, small changes yield big results, and when we make
them our habits, effortless fitness ensues. Here are the pillars of a Fiber Fueled
life:
Diversity of plants is the number one predictor of a healthy gut microbiota
At this point, you probably don’t need me to explain why the Golden Rule of
plant-based diversity matters. You’ve heard it throughout this book. This is our
anthem. Our core philosophy. We no longer need a laundry list of food rules, we
only need to remember to eat a diversity of plants. When you walk into the
supermarket, remember: “Diversity of plants.” When you’re at the salad bar,
trying to figure out what to add, remember: “Diversity of plants.” “Diversity of
plants” should cross your mind whenever you’re thinking about what to eat. It
will help you in your quest to maximize plant-based diversity.
   And remember: Plant-based diversity is a celebration of nature’s abundance.
You get to taste and enjoy all the flavors, all the textures. Herbs and spices
abound. Gone are the days of dietary restriction and lists of “approved” foods. Is
it a plant? Okay, cool, we’re good. We should be striving to include at least
thirty different plants per week. But truly, if you’re on a mission to maximize
diversity with each meal, you’re going to crush that goal.


      What’s better—raw or cooked?
            New research indicates that the same plant will have different effects on the gut microbiome in
            raw and cooked forms. Cooking alters the carbohydrates, like fiber, and many of the chemicals
            in the plants. The result is a different effect on microbial growth, the genetic makeup of the
            microbiome, and the types of postbiotics generated. While we can’t say that one is necessarily
            better, we can say that they’re different. Here’s a pro tip: If you’re cooking your food, make
            sure to nibble on some of the raw ingredients to get their unique benefits and add even more
            plant-based diversity to your meal.




Strive toward gut fitness by exercising your gut
There are some of you who will struggle with this process more than others. As
we discussed in Chapter 5, you may need the help of a doctor to make sure
there’s no constipation, food allergy, celiac disease, or alternative explanation
for your issues. If you’ve ruled out everything except food sensitivity, then we
need to identify the strengths and weaknesses within your gut. We all have them!
Rather than looking at food as black and white—either you tolerate or you don’t
—we should instead be looking at the shades of gray. There’s a certain amount
you can tolerate and that’s entirely personal and determined by your individual
gut microbiota.
   As part of the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks (see Chapter 10), I’ve labeled the
moderate- and high-FODMAP ingredients and even offered substitutions. This
way, if you have a meal and then develop digestive distress, it gives you an idea
of which ingredient may have been problematic. A food diary can help you keep
notes and potentially identify triggers. Among the FODMAPs, there may be
specific categories that cause more trouble for you than others—fructose,
fructans, galactans, or polyols. It could be lactose if you’re consuming dairy as
well, although I would eliminate dairy if you’re having ongoing digestive issues.
   If you identify which FODMAPs cause the most trouble, then you know
which ones you need to ease into. Plan to go back to the same recipe in the
future and make low FODMAP substitutions and see if it’s a better experience
for you. But if it remains a mystery and you just don’t seem to be making
progress, even after going through the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, then you may need
to work with a registered dietitian to do a formal FODMAP elimination and
reintroduction. This is a lengthy and fairly complex process, and it takes more
than twenty-eight days to complete. But if you need to do it, make sure you do it
right under the guidance of a qualified professional.
F GOALS: The foundation on which plant-based diversity is built
In Chapter 8 we explored the health benefits of our F GOALS foods. These are
the gut health superfoods on which we want to build our microbiome, and the
starting point or core diet. Plant-based diversity remains the mission, and F
GOALS are the fundamental foods in that mission. In them, you’ll find all the
good stuff: SCFA-producing fiber, vitamins, minerals, microbes, and unique
phytochemicals like sulforaphane. I’m challenging you to step your game up and
have something from this list every day.


     Is a little meat and dairy okay?
           We discussed in Chapter 2 that there are healthy and unhealthy proteins and fats. Plants and
         animal products clearly have different effects on the gut microbiota and on health outcomes.
         Whether you choose to include animal products in your diet is ultimately your choice, but the
         bottom line from my perspective is that it doesn’t improve your health. I personally have opted
         to eliminate animal products from my diet and feel great in doing so. But I also can’t say that
         you’re “unhealthy” if you continue to consume a small amount. By small, I mean radically
         different than the 220 pounds of meat and 30 pounds of cheese that the average American is
         currently consuming. Again, I believe in being at least 90 percent plant-based. What you do
         with that last 10 percent is up to you, but I am challenging you to continue your health
         mindset, to never accept stagnation, and to strive toward better health.
             Some people may wonder: Are grass-fed hormone- and antibiotic-free animal products
         good for your health? Well, yes compared to antibiotic-laden, hormone-infused, GMO-fed
         animal meats, but that’s like saying chewing tobacco is healthier than smoking a cigarette. It
         doesn’t mean it’s actually good for you—it’s just relatively better. I’d encourage you to spend
         some time deciding where you stand.
             Should the environmental impact or ethics of our food choices be considered? I believe we
         all have a responsibility to educate ourselves and come to our own conclusions. Remember,
         we don’t just have a microbiome in our guts; the soil does, the plants do, and animals do, too.
         The twentieth and twenty-first centuries haven’t been very kind to any of them, which is a
         result of human activity.
             If you choose to taper down your animal products, one approach is an elimination
         progression, moving up the chain to higher-quality substitutions over the course of time:
             Eliminate Beef > Pork > Chicken > Eggs > Salmon and then land on Tofu and Beans




    F GOALS


    F: Fruit (spotlight on berries) & Fermented
    G: Greens & Grains
    O: Omega-3 Super Seeds
    A: Aromatics (onions, garlic)
    L: Legumes
    S: Sulforaphane (broccoli sprouts and other cruciferous veggies)

  In Chapter 8 we learned a few tricks to get the most from our F GOALS
foods. Mushrooms should be cooked, while aromatics and cruciferous
vegetables are generally best enjoyed raw. Aromatics and cruciferous veggies
have enzymes that need to be activated to maximize the health benefits, so we
can use the CHOP then STOP trick to bring out those phytochemicals. When it
comes to super seeds, remember: flax for lignans, chia for fiber, hemp for
protein. Or why not all three in a morning smoothie? And don’t be shy about
adding greens at every single meal, even if it’s just a handful that you eat raw.
They are maximum nutrients with minimum calories. Put your foot down on the
accelerator and go all out on them.
Don’t overlook the importance of hydration
For years I would roll out of bed and walk like a zombie to the coffeepot. I’d
spend the next couple of hours trying to feel alive, attempting to slap the fatigue
out of my face with caffeine. At some point I’d cross that line and feel awake,
but then also strangely strung out and jittery from too much caffeine. Why
couldn’t this be simple?
   It can be. It starts with water, the simplest, healthiest, and least expensive
beverage on the planet. I’m as guilty of this as anyone, but it’s amazing that we
pay several dollars to drink a soda or something else that’s going to hurt us when
restaurants will provide you ice water for free. Frankly, we should be more
appreciative of our access to water. It’s a requirement for life. At least 60 percent
of your body is composed of water. You could go three weeks without food but
you wouldn’t last more than four days without water. It’s vital! And life giving.
   Unfortunately our twenty-first-century lifestyle is ignoring this health marvel.
For most of us, our most dehydrated time during the day is when we first wake
up. We haven’t had anything to drink for several hours, and so it’s the ideal time
to rehydrate our bodies. In the last few years I changed my routine to start with
two large glasses of water. It’s amazing the difference this little change provides.
It turns on my brain, gut, and kidneys and I feel much more awake. I still reach
for the coffee, but after I’ve had my water.
   Then, as the morning progresses, I make sure to keep things balanced between
coffee and water. There’s no more straight coffee. I’m doing both, but favoring
more water than coffee. I pay attention to my lips now. When I feel my lips
getting a little chapped I’ll grab the water bottle.
   To optimize hydration, my recommendation is to wake up and have two large
glasses of water first thing in the morning like I do. Make sure to drink more
water than coffee or other caffeinated product in the morning. Add two glasses
of water to each meal. This will help you get up to eight glasses of water per day
and help your body function the way it was meant to.
Let’s choose refreshments that actually refresh us
It’s really not that hard to incorporate healing salves into your beverage
selection. Small changes yield massive results when it’s your daily routine, and
this is one we can easily take advantage of! Here are some great ways to make
better beverage selections to amp up your gut health throughout the day:


               Jazz up your water: I love a good squeeze of citrus in my water
               and have more than gotten my money’s worth from my juice
               squeezer. Throw a couple of slices of citrus and some water in a
               giant mason jar with some ice on a great summer day. Or infuse
               your water overnight with cucumbers or watermelon and mint
               and pamper yourself with spa-worthy hydration.
               A little coffee in the morning: I’m a believer! Coffee contains
               polyphenols that act as prebiotics for the microbiota. It’s also the
               biggest source of antioxidants in the Western diet right now. I’m
               trying to change that by spreading the Fiber Fueled message, but
               in the meantime I don’t see a reason to give it up. The problem
               with coffee is the junk we throw in it. I converted to straight black
               coffee, and I love it. But if you absolutely must add a sweetener, a
               little bit of stevia, monk fruit, or erythritol will do the trick. And
               creamer? I’d skip the dairy and go with organic soy milk. I know
               lots of people who love unsweetened oat milk in their coffee. I
               also love spicing up my coffee—cinnamon, ginger, and turmeric
               is a fave combo. If I’m dragging and need an extra kick, I’ll drop
               some maca and ashwagandha in there. These are adaptogenic
               superfoods derived from roots that combat fatigue and stress. If
               I’m adding spices, I’m usually adding some organic soy milk and
               sweetener as well to soften the flavors. But keep your coffee to
               two cups max. Also remember to pound the water before, during,
               and after coffee consumption. Finally, if you have a diarrhea-
               related issue, such as irritable bowel, coffee may aggravate your
               symptoms.


    A note on caffeine
         I generally am not opposed to caffeine. Okay, fine, I’ll admit—I love it. Couldn’t have
         survived internship without it. But some of you may suffer from caffeine sensitivity, which
         can exacerbate digestive issues. There’s actually a gene that causes this. If you’re worried
         about this possibility, I’d consider eliminating all caffeine for a week and see how you feel.




               Green tea in the afternoon: One of my favorite rituals is to have
hot green tea an hour or two after lunch. It really invigorates me
for the afternoon, and tea has a phytochemical called L-theanine
that improves focus. You’ll notice the difference compared to
coffee. Green tea is also an excellent source of prebiotic
polyphenols. My specific recommendation for green tea is
organic ceremonial-grade matcha tea. It’s rich in antioxidants and
offers literally one hundred times more prebiotic polyphenol
EGCG than conventional green tea. All you have to do is add hot
water, although you can crank the antioxidants even higher with a
squeeze of citrus because the vitamin C dramatically improves
their absorption, meaning you get even more from the same cup
of tea. Speaking of which, try making a matcha cooler by
throwing matcha in a mason jar with some ice and a lemon. It’s a
drink that makes me think of Arnold Palmer, the late great golfer,
who loved combining iced tea and lemonade.
Smoothies over juice: I’m not anti-juice. I’m just pro-smoothie.
What are you doing when you create the juice? That’s right,
separating the fiber and then throwing it out. Removing the fiber
but keeping the sugar gives me a bad case of processed food déjà
vu. Remember, we want to be Fiber Fueled. But that said, I’ve
also been preaching “low and slow, that is the motto” when it
comes to fiber, and since smoothies are such a beautifully dense
heaping of fiber, it may be too much for some of you as you ramp
up fiber and FODMAPs. In that case, juice can help to get you the
phytonutrients without pushing you too hard on the fiber. But
juices shouldn’t be piña colada–flavored, they should be at least
somewhat bitter. If you’re making a fruit juice, you’re basically
creating a sugar beverage. Fructose in whole fruit is fine, but
when you toss the fiber it becomes straight sugar. So when
making juice, my recommendation is to use almost exclusively
veggies with minimal fruit and embrace the bitter flavor!
Easy on the ’booch: I love kombucha and drink it routinely. I
think it can definitely be a part of a healthy lifestyle, but there’s a
lot of hype that’s motivating people to slug down 32 ounces per
day and rely on it as their only fermented food. I’d far rather you
drink ’booch than soda or other sweetened beverages, but the
acidity can erode the enamel on your teeth, so I always dilute it
down substantially. Drink it with at least half water. I only drink 4
or so ounces per day, a fraction of a 16-ounce bottle you can buy
                  at the store. But that 4 ounces turns into 8 to 12 for me after I
                  dilute it down.
                  Avoid alcohol: I know this isn’t what some of you want to hear,
                  but if we’re building a healthy gut I would recommend avoidance
                  of alcohol. It’s clear that binge alcohol consumption causes
                  damage to the gut microbiota, increasing intestinal permeability,
                  and the release of bacterial endotoxin. In other words, alcohol
                  causes dysbiosis. Believe it or not, this is how alcohol causes
                  cirrhosis. You don’t have to be an alcoholic, either. Just a single
                  crazy Friday night can damage your gut. Is it possible that these
                  rules don’t apply to light drinking, though? Unfortunately, not.
                  Just one drink per day increases your risk of high blood pressure
                  and stroke. Just a half drink per day has been associated with
                  increased risk of cancer. There is strong consensus among the
                  scientific community that alcohol causes cancer. We shouldn’t be
                  so surprised, though—alcohol kills bacteria, and in the case of our
                  guts, this can mean it attacks our “good” bugs.


      Are the rules different for red wine?
            Some experts argue that red wine is good for us because it has the polyphenol resveratrol. It’s
            true that polyphenols in red wine are prebiotic and can increase gut diversity. It’s also true that
            resveratrol in red wine has been linked with heart health, but it wasn’t until recently that we
            discovered the mechanism—once again involving gut bacteria. Resveratrol in red wine
            decreases TMAO levels by inhibiting the production of TMA by the gut microbiota. TMA is
            the precursor to TMAO. We know from Chapter 2 that TMAO comes from consumption of
            meat, eggs, and high-fat dairy and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of heart disease,
            stroke, Alzheimer’s, type 2 diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. Five of the top ten killers. In
            a country that eats more meat than any other in the world, of course having a way to slow
            down TMAO production would benefit the heart, but drinking red wine to do it can create
            alcohol dependence and potentially cirrhosis. Why not just reduce our red meat consumption
            and eat more plants? Grapes, blueberries, raspberries, mulberries, and even peanuts have
            resveratrol, but without the risks. That said, if we’re going to responsibly enjoy alcohol, the
            occasional glass of red wine would be the way to do it.




Activate your satiety hormones naturally
We’ve all been conditioned to focus on the amount of food—whether we’re
counting calories or macronutrient percentages of whatever. I’ve heard of diets
where people even weigh their food. It can be so complicated! But it doesn’t
have to be. Let me make this incredibly simple: When you reach for whole plant
foods, you can eat WITHOUT RESTRICTION. No exaggeration, you have my
green light to eat as much as you want. I’m going to say it again. Eat as much as
you want. You’ll still lose weight and get all the health benefits.
   Here’s why this works: Thank the fiber and resistant starch. Whole plant
foods are by definition high nutrient, low calorie. There is the requirement to
actually chew them; you can’t just inhale them. We know that chewing takes
time. When we eat a salad, it takes longer than eating a hot dog. As we learned
in Chapter 3, fiber and resistant starches produce SCFAs that trigger the release
of satiety hormones. By taking our time to chew fiber-rich food, we are allowing
our body to use its natural mechanisms to tell us when we’ve had enough. No
need to count calories. Mother Nature is counting them for you. You’ll feel full
and satisfied, and know that it’s been enough. And it will be a meal jam-packed
with nutrients and fiber.
   For most of human history, our species consumed whole plant foods to the
tune of 100 grams of fiber or more per day. This was real food that grew in the
dirt. Not fried okra, veggie burgers, processed grains like bread, or nondairy ice
cream. When we process our food, we strip away the fiber. We pervert nature’s
balance and create artificially calorie-dense, fiber-poor foods that encourage
overeating. Processed foods are the majority of America’s diet. Most of the rest
is meat, dairy, eggs, and oil. Calorically dense with a net fiber offering of zero.
And then we wonder why we overeat and have an obesity problem and the
associated health issues.
   If you flip the ratio by following the plan in this book and eat 90 to 100
percent plant-based with diversity of plants, counting calories will not be
necessary. You can eat when you’re hungry, eat until you’re full and satisfied,
and you’ll still lose weight thanks to being Fiber Fueled.
Engage in mindful eating
Go, go, go! That’s the American lifestyle these days. I’m as guilty as anyone. I
push myself to move faster, do more, and I sometimes skip meals. Let’s start by
taking a deep breath. There are some things in life that are too important to let
the rat race infringe on them. It’s unhealthy to inhale your food. The process of
digestion starts in your mouth, where mastication breaks up the food and
amylase in saliva begins to break down the starches. When we eat too fast, we
don’t allow our body to catch up with what we’re doing, which leads to
overeating. We weren’t designed to scarf down food and get it over as quickly as
possible; we’re wired to enjoy our food and allow our body to signal us when
it’s full.
   When I was a kid my Granddaddy would always say, “Small bites, and chew
well!” We all need to follow Granddaddy’s sage advice by reengaging with our
food. Mindful eating is simply getting back to our roots of enjoying our food.
It’s having the manners that your grandparents taught you when you were a kid.
Here’s how you do it:


                   Sit down at an actual table. No eating in the car or while you
                   walk. Put your food on a plate or in a bowl. Don’t eat out of a
                   container.
                   Turn off your cell phone. Put down your laptop. Shut off the
                   TV. No electronics during this sacred time.
                   Spend a moment observing your food before you start.
                   Celebrate nature’s bounty—the looks, the smells. It’s beautiful.
                   Take a moment to taste your food. It doesn’t have to be with
                   every bite, but you should routinely take moments to pause.
                   Chew your food! Not one or two chomps. I’m talking twenty-
                   five or more bites. Set your fork down while you chew.
                   Observe the Japanese tradition of hara hachi bu. As described
                   in The Blue Zones, this means eating until you’re 80 percent full
                   and then stopping. By doing this, you’re giving your body a
                   chance to catch up so that you’re just right and not overshooting.
                   Enjoy meals with other people when you can. The Europeans
                   have mastered this and we Americans are struggling. We should
                   be taking our time and enjoying each other’s company while we
                   eat, not sprinting to inhale our food so we can get back to work.
                   Schedule your mealtimes. Maintain a regular schedule that taps
                   into your circadian rhythm. An early dinnertime is key. I’ll talk
                   more about this in the next section.
                   Avoid toxic hunger. Eating as a reaction to hunger or to emotion
                   is an unhealthy practice. You’re far more likely to reach for
                   unhealthy “comfort” foods than nourishing, healthy foods. If you
                   feel hunger coming on, don’t wait until it’s turned you into a
                   carb-starved monster. This is where a piece of fruit or a handful
                   of nuts can do the trick to hold you over until your next scheduled
                   mealtime.

It’s not just what you eat but when you eat that matters . . .
Our body has a natural biorhythm that we call our circadian rhythm. This is an
endogenous, entrainable oscillation of about twenty-four hours that’s a part of all
life throughout our planet—other animals, plants, fungi. They all have this. Our
gut microbes are no exception! When you disrupt your natural rhythm you are
also perturbing your microbes. For example, jet lag actually induces dysbiosis in
the gut microbes, which is why you feel like trash when flying internationally.
And don’t get me started on the shared cultural nightmare that is daylight saving
time. If you are a shift worker, you probably also know this feeling well. Shift
workers are at increased risk for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and type
2 diabetes because of what a disrupted circadian rhythm does to the gut
microbiome.
   Our gut microbes thrive on consistency that’s anchored into these twenty-
four-hour oscillations, and that means timely meals. For example, you can eat
literally the exact same food but at different times in the day and have a different
effect on your blood sugar. We are most insulin sensitive in the morning and
most insulin resistant in the evening. To optimize our eating patterns, we want to
anchor our eating around the times that we need our fuel, and then allow our gut
to rest for a period of time. This approach is called time-restricted eating, or
TRE. Some call it intermittent fasting, but this isn’t intermittent. It’s a lifestyle
that you sustain day to day.
   To properly do TRE, you have to do two things. First, you create time
boundaries so there’s a period of food consumption and a period of sustained
bowel rest. My recommendation is to rest your gut for at least thirteen
consecutive hours, which means restricting your eating hours to eleven or less.
   Second, you need to synchronize your eating pattern with your circadian
biology. This is the part that many people are overlooking. It’s not just any
thirteen hours. Do you need to have a big meal in the evening or have a snack at
10:00 p.m.? Of course not. TRE is not meant to be first meal at 11:00 a.m. and
last meal at 10:00 p.m. That’s a whacked-out biorhythm. To get things properly
aligned, you should eat dinner early in the evening and then it’s a hard line—no
food after dinner! Just water. It’s also important to create a space of at least two
if not three hours between when you stop eating and your bedtime. The earlier
the better on dinner.


     Does coffee break the fast?
          Yes and no. Fasting benefits the gut microbes because they get a break to reset, and anything
          but water interrupts that. But the fat-burning metabolic benefits continue if you drink coffee
          and avoid solid food. I personally have had great success with twelve hours of strict water
          fasting followed by coffee and delaying my first solid food for a few more hours in the
            morning.



   On the topic of optimizing our biorhythm, let’s talk about meal size. We tend
to gorge ourselves at dinner, but it doesn’t really make sense. We don’t need a
massive dinner when we should be winding down for sleep shortly after. On the
flip side, we’ve been overlooking lunch. Midday is when we need energy the
most. So let’s invest a little more into a nice, satisfying lunch.
Supplements are meant to supplement diet and lifestyle, not replace them
As we discussed in Chapter 7, you can’t overcome a bad diet or unhealthy
lifestyle with supplements. We also see a lot of hype around supplements in the
absence of science. Many of the most popular supplements on the market have
little to no research to actually support them. They can be a waste of your money
or, worse yet, they can harm you because they’re not different from taking a
medication. At least with medicine we know what the risks are. If you take five
or more supplements because they’re “natural,” I can assure you that no one
knows what they are doing in combination.
    But I do believe there’s a role for supplements when properly used. They
allow us to optimize our diet. As we discussed in Chapter 7, I’m a believer in
prebiotics and in some cases probiotics. There are three supplements that I
generally recommend to address some of the challenges in our twenty-first-
century life: vitamin B12, vitamin D, and an algae-based omega-3 supplement.
It’s best to discuss these with your doctor to determine if they make sense for
you and, if so, what dosage you should take.
Sleep is powerfully restorative
It’s actually incredible the way your body heals when you just allow it to rest.
You can think of time-restricted eating as rest for your gut. But sleep is rest for
the entire body, including the gut. When we deprive ourselves of sleep, we feel
the effects in the microbiome as it shifts toward a profile promoting obesity. No
wonder we feel so crummy after a poor night’s rest. Insufficient sleep is
associated with increased appetite, weight gain, increased risk of heart
disease/stroke/diabetes,      impaired       immunity,       depression,      poor
concentration/productivity/work performance, and even poor athletic
performance. Sleep is free and it powerfully promotes better health, including in
your microbes.
   It’s important not only that we get enough sleep, but also that it’s anchored to
our circadian biology. The circadian rhythm in sleep and wakefulness is
primarily synchronized to the rise and fall of the sun. When you get up in the
morning, make it a point to expose yourself to natural sunlight. Even a short
walk outside can work wonders. On the flip side, we need to wind down when
the sun goes down at night. Ideally, we should stop using electronics during this
time because the bright light impairs melatonin release. We should also strive
toward an earlier bedtime. In the words of Ben Franklin, “Early to bed and early
to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.”
Time to reconnect with nature
Speaking of seeing the sun, think of how much life has changed for us humans in
the last few hundred years. We went from predominantly outdoor creatures to
the sterile, bleached interior of our homes and offices. Seems safer, but is it?
We’ve certainly drifted away from nature. We’ve seen in this book that living
creatures either have a microbiota or are a part of the microbiota. Microbes are a
fundamental part of life on Earth. So what happens when we surround ourselves
with lifeless physical structures (our homes) that we spray with chemicals?
Unlike the lush habitats in nature, our man-made structures are a microbial
badland that fails to contribute to your microbial diversity. No surprise, moving
from a rural environment to the city has been associated with the loss of
beneficial microbes and an increase in dangerous genes.
   Conceptually this goes back to the hygiene hypothesis discussed in Chapter 1.
Exposure to the outdoors early in life has been shown to improve immune
function. Adults who exercise outdoors have more diverse microbiomes.
Gardening improves mood, lowers stress, increases life satisfaction, and even
promotes weight loss. Not to mention that growing your own veggies has been
shown to make you enjoy eating them even more! We’ve even found that
barefoot contact with the earth can improve mood, boost creativity, and give you
more restful sleep.
   The point is we need to look for opportunities to get outdoors. Don’t run on
the treadmill when you could actually run outside. Don’t buy your plants when
you could grow them. Don’t read this book on the couch when you could throw
down a blanket and take off your shoes outside. And since we will continue to
live indoors, let’s make the most of it and decorate our homes and offices with
potted plants. Making time to trade microbes with nature is a necessary and
wildly underrated contributor to human health. Every single one of us should
have an outdoor hobby for every season of the year.
Regular exercise contributes to gut health
I find it amazing the way that fitness contributes to gut fitness. Our movement
pattern, whether active or sluggish, ultimately has an effect on our microbes. In
mice we see exercise induce dramatic changes in the gut microbiota, with more
SCFA producers and improved intestinal integrity. Believe it or not, there was a
40 percent increase in healthy microbes with exercise. Similarly, in adult
humans we see increased SCFA-producing gut microbes with regular exercise.
The effect is lost when you stop moving.
   The fact that SCFA-producing microbes are generated through exercise says a
lot. Mother Nature rewards us for good behavior, and the currency is SCFAs.
Whether it’s healthy eating or exercise, they share a common pathway that leads
to health benefit. Once again, all signs point toward the relevance of SCFAs in
human health. This explains why a healthy diet and exercise are individually
great but in combination you get a synergistic effect.
   Take a short fifteen- to thirty-minute walk after dinner, for example. Research
shows us that it helps mobilize and empty your stomach, which helps digestion
and reduces the likelihood of having acid reflux. A short walk stabilizes blood
sugar and reduces triglycerides, contributing to a lower risk of coronary heart
disease. Fat is burned and weight is lost. Your immune system gets stronger and
risk of infection declines. Your energy levels and mood are lifted up. A walk
outside even unlocks the creative part of your brain. All of this from just having
a healthy routine that involves a walk after dinner. So easy!
   Make no mistake—you can’t exercise your way out of a bad diet. I’ve proven
that firsthand. The benefits of exercise and plant-based eating go hand in hand. If
exercise is not currently a part of your lifestyle, try walking at least thirty
minutes three times a week. But if you only have ten minutes, start there. You
can work to increase your time. When you exercise, it’s going to hurt a little in
the beginning, but it’ll get better as you get stronger. Just like when you exercise
your gut.
We need human connection to thrive
The highest form of torture is isolation, removing a person from other humans.
We are by definition social creatures; it’s a part of our biology. We’re living in
the era of “social media,” yet are more isolated than ever. Social media is not
only antisocial; it’s bad for our mental health and may be bad for our gut.
   Life and microbes are meant to be shared with others. Believe it or not, each
one of us has a unique “bacterial cloud” that follows us around. We’re each
emitting about a million particles into our environment per hour. Close
proximity to others has the potential for sharing among our bacterial cloud.
Studies show that you’re likely to share microbiome similarities with the people
you live with. These relationships have even been shown to impact our genetic
expression. Even having our furry friends—dogs and cats—can contribute to
microbiome health and protect us from disease. Our environment and the people
we surround ourselves with allow a microbial exchange that keeps us alive and
thriving. In a hypersterile world, I celebrate the microbes that some call germs or
dirty.
   We need to get back to the basics of spending time with real people: shaking
hands, giving high fives, looking someone in the eye when they’re talking. It’s
time to put down the phone and get back to how we’re wired—for human
connection.
Stress management is key
Stress impacts the gut. In fact, stress alone can create alterations in the gut
microbiota and an increase in intestinal permeability leading to dysbiosis. This is
why you can drink your green smoothie, eat your plants, go to the gym, and get a
good night’s rest, but if your heart and head aren’t at peace then neither are your
microbes. Many of the worst digestive issues that I see in my clinic are in the
victims of abuse or those recovering from an eating disorder.
   The good news is that the opposite is also true. Stress-reducing practices, such
as meditation, are actually good for your gut. Take away the stress and suddenly
the gut microbiota increase production of SCFAs and anti-inflammatory
metabolites. All signs point to the importance of self-care and having a stress
management practice. Some would call this mindfulness.
   It can be simple. Just five minutes at least once a day in a quiet space. Settle
into a comfortable position, loosen your clothes. This is your time, but you’re
going to dedicate it to the positive things in your life. There are four steps. First,
think of something you’re grateful for. Focus on a positive thing that’s happened
to you. Second, think of someone you love. Take a moment to appreciate the
positive role they have in your life. Third, clarify your intention. You’re drawing
a map to where you want to go. What do you want to happen in your life? This
can be anything—an emotion, behavior, or goal. Make sure it’s positive and
something immediately applicable in the short term. Last but not least, release
your mind, focus on your breathing, and allow thoughts to naturally enter your
mind. End with a few deep breaths and focus your eyes softly.




To view the 45+ scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
                                                                              10
The Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
                                             Become a plant-based rock star




In my mind I imagine we’re sitting across from each other at a coffee shop, not
my office—this isn’t a medical visit. We’re talking about all the big things: life,
health, family. Our values. To me, taking care of our health is crucial to all
aspects of our life. And I hope I’ve convinced you to believe the same. The
Fiber Fueled four-week plan is the start of the new you—it lets you lead your
life with energy, vitality, and confidence, while you protect your body from
disease.
   Obviously making the transition to a plant-based diet has some challenges.
We’re up against habits, cravings, and even addiction to our meat, dairy, sugar,
fat, and processed grains. Quitting these foods can literally cause withdrawal
symptoms. Cravings will certainly happen. It’s going to take some effort to
change old habits, believe me, I know.
   But just know that we’re all in this together. You are not alone. And I will
give you the tools you need to make this shift. This program was designed for
my own patients, as a way to optimize the gut, eliminate cravings, strengthen the
immune system, improve energy levels, and resolve digestive issues. If this can
work for them, it can work for you, too. In just twenty-eight days you’ll take
back your health, break the chains of food addiction, amplify your plant
diversity, build a strategy for food sensitivity, and reemerge as the fitter,
healthier, and happier person you deserve to be. Are you ready for it? Okay, let’s
get started!
What’s in the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
In the coming pages you’ll find more than sixty-five mouthwatering, plant-based
recipes organized into a twenty-eight-day calendar for you. I’m sure the
suspense is killing you, so if you want to flip ahead and check out a couple of
them, I don’t blame you! Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge with a Matcha
Latte . . . The Daily Salad with Supercharged Roasted Roots and Oil-Free
Orange Dressing . . . Creamy polenta with quick lentil ragu (Plant-Powered
Polenta Ragu) . . . Folks, that’s just Day 1.
   You are going to have an incredible month filled with delicious food thanks to
my friend Alexandra Caspero. Alex is a registered dietitian and recipe developer
who shares my food philosophy. We both believe that plant foods are delicious,
healthy, and to be enjoyed in abundance. So we developed the Fiber Fueled 4
Weeks together to manifest the teachings of this book but also to offer an
individualized experience. We recognize that there is no “one size fits all.”
   To that end, for each of the twenty-eight days you’ll find three recipes:
breakfast, lunch, and dinner—but of course! Those are spelled out on a daily
basis for you. But then we also have the weekly drink, snack, and dessert
recipes. We give you a few of those each week to enhance your experience as
you deem fit. They could be daily, or you may not use them at all: It’s whatever
works best for you.
   One of our priorities in the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks was to make this as easy as
possible for you. Let’s be honest, doing a twenty-eight-day plan in any book
isn’t easy. We know that going in. Easy would be picking up fast food on the
way home from a long day’s work. Instead, you’re going to be cooking food.
You’re going to be picking up groceries. Lots of them, because that’s what
plant-based diversity is about. But in developing our Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, we
really wanted to control what we could and ease your burden.
   So we intentionally pushed for recipes that are reasonably simple while still
emphasizing diversity of plants. We’re also providing you with additional
resources to make this easier for you. Every week there is a shopping list. It’s
here in this book, but if you’d like it in a printable version so that you can easily
carry it into the market, email me at shoppinglist@theplantfedgut.com and I’ll be
happy to share that with you.
   We’ve also built in a cooking day once a week. We suggest you pick one day
where you’ll spend a few hours prepping meals for the week. We have it listed
as Sunday, because that’s what most of you will do. But if a different day is
better for you, feel free to switch it up. Prep day will allow you to have several
things premade and ready to go, paying dividends later in the week when you
need to throw something together in two seconds.
   We also have several days where you’ll reuse a recipe, most of the time with a
new spin on the second go-round. For example, you’ll prep the Biome Broth
(our take on plant-based bone broth) for Week 1, then use it for Wild Biome
Super Soup on Day 2, and even use it to build a Miso, Mushroom, and Soba
Bowl in Week 2. Or there’s the Tempeh Tacos on Day 2 followed by the
Tempeh Taco Salad with Creamy Cilantro Sauce on Day 4. All this talk is
making you hungry, isn’t it?
   Finally, this plan isn’t about tough love and testing your persistence. This plan
is the philosophy in this book: progress over perfection, plants in abundance,
slow and low with fiber and FODMAPs, training the gut and working toward 90
percent or more plant-based. With that in mind, we encourage you to modify it
based upon your individual needs. If you need to add meat on top, so be it.
Progress over perfection. If you aren’t excited about a recipe and you want to
redo one of the ones from earlier in the week, just do it. And if you come home
from work and don’t have time to cook, don’t worry because we have included
Quick-Fix recipes (see these pages: 1, 2, 3, 4) that you can turn to if you’re not
in the mood to cook. Basically, we want you to march your way through this
plan and emerge on the other side as a healthier version of yourself, and do it on
your terms and in the way that you feel works best.


Before you begin
We’ve created a list of items for your purchase prior to starting the Fiber Fueled
4 Weeks. I recommend taking a day before getting started to go through your
kitchen to see what you have and what you don’t have. We don’t want you to be
halfway through the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks and realize you need a piece of
equipment that won’t arrive for five days. And we want all the spices ready and
handy. So we’ve created a Pre-FF4W checklist of items to get, including
nonperishable foods and kitchen tools.


The philosophy behind the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
Alex is a registered dietitian, so not only does she know how to develop
delicious recipes, but she’s a nutrition expert who has completed the formal
coursework, supervised internship, and national examination necessary to be
qualified as an RD. Translation: She understands the science in great detail. You
may have noticed that good science is really important to me. Yeah, I’m a nerd.
  So what you’re getting in the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks goes so far beyond a
bunch of plant-based recipes. There are layers of complexity that are built into
the plan. Little tricks or strategies that Alex and I came up with to give you the
optimal experience. But you don’t need to worry, you just follow the plan, and in
the process you get all of those benefits. It’s our ninja way of delivering
something powerful and cutting edge that’s still straightforward and easy to
follow.
   In case you’re interested in knowing what’s going on behind the scenes,
here’s how it’s going down: In Week 1, we’re going to ease you into a plant-
based diet with a one-week detox. These recipes were intentionally constructed
with delicious plant foods that are also gentle on the gut. It gives you a chance to
sweep out the junk of your old diet, ease into fiber and FODMAPs, and lay the
foundation for a revitalized microbiome. We’re not ignoring plant-based
diversity, we’re just moving slowly. Think of this as mild exercise. A brisk walk.
A casual bike ride.
   After that first week, it’s time to start training our gut. We’ll start with
moderate exercise and ramp up over the course of the last three weeks. What I’m
referring to here is the FODMAP content of our food. As we move through the
Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks you’ll be on a FODMAP progression. As I’ve said
throughout the book, “Slow and low, that is the motto.” We’re also going to
ramp up plant-based diversity. The addition of plant varieties translates into
increased bacterial richness in our microbiome.


     What to do with gluten?
          Believe it or not, there isn’t a ton of gluten in the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks. The pancakes are
          gluten free, buckwheat doesn’t actually contain wheat, and the bread is usually sourdough,
          which is pretty close to gluten free. But if you’re strictly gluten free, make sure you keep that
          in mind going in so that you can make the appropriate substitutions as noted.




Why 28 days? Why not a quick 7- or 14-day detox?
I probably don’t need to tell you this, but the length of the plan isn’t some
arbitrary period of time. Sure, it would’ve been easier to call it a detox and
shorten it substantially, but you deserve better. A detox is a bridge to nowhere,
and before long you return to your old habits and nothing’s changed. Same for
fad diets. This isn’t a twenty-eight day plan that you do as an isolated event. This
is a new beginning for you. We’re laying the foundation of a revitalized
microbiome and after the twenty-eight days you will be on the path to continuing
what you started by living Fiber Fueled.
   Research shows that it takes twenty-eight days for the microbiome to adapt to
dietary fiber, get the digestive enzymes necessary for fiber processing, and
increase SCFA production. The major changes occur within twenty-eight days,
and after that things stay fairly stable. We also know that after antibiotics it takes
about four weeks for the microbiota to approximate its pretreatment state. And in
their study of TMAO, the Cleveland Clinic doctors found that it took about four
weeks to ramp up TMAO production, and then four weeks for the microbiota to
recover if you withdrew red meat from the diet. Four weeks keeps showing up as
the magic amount of time.
   This doesn’t mean that your work is done after four weeks. Particularly if you
have underlying dysbiosis, it may take longer to build up the strength of your
microbiota and get to where you ultimately want to be. But science shows us that
four weeks is around the time when the effort really starts to manifest in a
powerful way. And that is why this is a Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks.


How to get the most out of the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
You are a unique individual! Literally no one in the world has a gut microbiome
exactly like you, which means no one on the planet has the same taste buds or
food sensitivities as you. You have your own starting point on this health
journey, and you have your own goals for what you’re trying to accomplish.
Here are a few tips to maximize this journey for you:
Think of it as a culinary adventure
Over the next month, you’ll be trying more than seventy new recipes for the first
time. I’m sure there will be new flavors, new textures, and new ingredients. If
you were traveling, you’d be taking day trips to Mexico, Italy, Greece, Turkey,
India, Thailand, Korea, and Japan. Now that would be exhausting. So why not
send your taste buds on this world tour while you are hanging in the comforts of
your kitchen? And we still made time for American classics with a Fiber Fueled
twist: Buffalo Chickpea Salad, No-Tuna Sunflower Salad on sourdough, and
New Orleans gumbo (see Gumbo).
   Without a doubt, we love these recipes and can’t wait to share them with you.
I think you’re going to love them, too! We want to offer you many different
tastes so that you can discover where your plant passion lies. It’s a jump start to
the ultimate goal—an FF365 lifestyle. If you worry that you’re not going to love
these foods, don’t worry. We’ve built enough variety into this plan to help you
find something that you love. And the other thing is that your taste buds are
definitely going to change. It happened for me, and it will happen for you, too.
   I want you to keep a journal to track your journey during the FF4W. How did
you feel about each recipe? Make notes and give each recipe a score from 0 to
10. Zero means it’s just not for you, end of story. And if you give it a 10, that
means you’re salivating at the thought and jumping for joy when it’s on the
menu.
   When the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks is over, I want you to go back and pick out
your three highest-rated breakfast dishes, five highest-rated lunches, and five
highest-rated dinners. After our taste buds are done with their world tour during
the four weeks, we ultimately want to settle in to real life and to have our “go-
to” recipes that we use throughout the week. Not necessarily every week—you
can use them however you feel is best. But the reality is that most of us have a
rotation of core recipes, and during the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks you’re going to
zero in on the dishes you like best.
You’re Sherlock Holmes, food sensitivity sleuth
In Chapter 5 we talked about identifying the strengths and weaknesses in your
gut, and using that information to train your gut by slowly introducing foods. In
the FF4W plan, we’re going to put that idea into action. Through our FODMAP
progression we systematically introduce our healthiest and most challenging
foods in a way that affords your gut an opportunity to start adapting to them. As
you’re going through this process, I’d like you to keep track of meals that cause
GI distress—gas, bloating, discomfort, and change in bowel habits. Mark the
meals in your journal that cause trouble so we can keep track.
   I’ve offered a FODMAP note after recipes to help with this process. The note
will explain what ingredients in a recipe have moderate or high FODMAP
content, and it will offer guidance for substitutions. This will help you identify
particular FODMAP categories you are most sensitive to (fructose, fructans,
galactans, polyols, or mannitols). At the end of the FF4W you can look back in
your journal to see what FODMAP categories were causing you the most
trouble. This is empowering information since it will reveal where your food
sensitivity lies. Over the course of time, you may eventually move past the low
FODMAP option, which is proof that you’re strengthening your gut.
   If you email me at fodmap@theplantfedgut.com, I will send you a list of foods
within each FODMAP category so that you can focus on the specific foods that
contain a large amount of the FODMAP you are sensitive to and learn to
moderate your portion size while you are training your gut.
   The Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks is a great way to begin the process of identifying
where your food sensitivity lies, but some of you with more advanced dysbiosis
may require individualized assistance from a qualified health professional. The
formal low FODMAP diet, including elimination and reintroduction, takes much
longer than twenty-eight days. So if you’re struggling even after doing the
FF4W, I’d encourage you to meet with a registered dietitian and go through that
process to work on the issue.
Your custom experience
The beauty of the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks is that we’re all sharing this collective
journey, yet we have our own individualized experience. It has to be that way!
We need a plan that’s adapted to your bioindividuality. With that in mind, the
plan is meant to be flexible. We expect you to bend the rules!
   Each week you’ll have recipes for drinks, snacks, and dessert. These are
totally optional, meaning that you’re under no obligation to make them but it’s
nice to have options for those things if you’re in the mood. Of course, you can
keep it super simple if you prefer and just snag a piece of fruit, some berries, or
some nuts.
   We give you a Quick Fix recipe for breakfast, lunch, and dinner each week. If
at any point you’re not able to cook, just sub in one of these recipes so you can
keep rolling. Similarly, feel free to adapt recipes as you feel fit. Finally, try not
to jump ahead in the schedule but feel free to bring back something that you’ve
already tried.
The Fiber Fueled Challenge: Earn your plant points to reach the next level of health
Take your gut health to the next level by earning Plant Points at every meal.
You’ll find them attached to every recipe and proportional to plant diversity.
This is a way to keep track of how you’re doing. It’s not a total number of plants
for the week, but it’s an easy way to keep track of total plant diversity—
provided you don’t eat the same eight plants at every meal!
   The Plant Points will help you step your game up to supercharge your plant
diversity. Over the course of the week, keep track of your Plant Points in your
journal. Add them up at the end of the week and punch them into the table
below. It’s totally okay if you start off on the low end of the spectrum. I was that
guy not that long ago. By tracking your Plant Points, we’re going to help you
increase your plant diversity over time so you can graduate to the highest level.
Tap into your inner plant-based rock star for inspiration to move up the
following levels:

      PLANT           WHAT LEVEL OF PLANT-BASED ROCK STAR ARE YOU?
      POINTS
      Less            ROCK ROOKIE
     than 150         You’re just getting started and haven’t felt the benefits yet, but I’m excited for
                      you as you embark on this journey and start to feel the difference.
     150–174          ROCK ARTIST
                      You’re starting to notice some changes. Your energy levels are higher, you’re
                      sleeping better, you don’t feel hungover after meals. You may be working
                      through some adjustments, but there are signs of progress.
     175–199          ROCK STAR
                      It’s happening! Changes in the gut are under way and you are thriving on
                      plant-based diversity with healthy bowel movements and better digestion.
     200–224          ROCK LEGEND
                      You are incredible! Pushing yourself to this level of plant-based diversity
                      rewards you with a gut that feels amazing and is doing its job throughout the
                      body to keep you well.
     More             ROCK GOD
     than             You are a Fiber Fueled God of Rock with a microbiome that is wildly
     225!             diversified and working like a well-oiled machine to keep you happy and
                      healthy.

  And the challenge doesn’t end after four weeks! Sure, during your average
week you don’t need to keep track of Plant Points because with your “health
mindset” you’re maximizing plant-based diversity anyway. But every once in a
while you may get an itch to have some fun and challenge yourself. When that
happens, keep track of your points so you can compare it to prior scores and see
how you do. Or even create a challenge on social media. Invite your friends or
make some new friends! Let’s get our Fiber Fueled community together for an
online party. Tag me so I can be there cheering with you.


     Calculate your own Plant Points
            In case you’re wondering, Plant Points are calculated by the number of plant foods included in
            the recipe. Every unique plant counts for one Plant Point. Pretty simple, right? Fresh herbs
            count, too, but dried herbs and spices don’t. I still love them, though, and totally encourage
            you to liberally apply spices and enjoy the health benefits that ensue!




Integrating the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks with the FF365 Lifestyle
As we get started on the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, make sure to keep in mind that
this is more than a meal plan. We’re building a lifestyle, galvanizing healthy
habits, and using our “health mindset.” So make sure to revisit the lifestyle
elements discussed in Chapter 9 and start to incorporate those healthy habits into
your routine. Multiple small changes can yield huge results. Our goal is to
establish a baseline routine that leads to effortless fitness.



The last word
Before you take that first step into the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks and what will be
the rest of your life, I want you to know that I wholeheartedly believe in the
power of the human spirit to persevere and overcome challenges. Nothing can
stop the person with the fire inside them and the right attitude. So wherever you
are coming from, if your mission is to heal your gut and recapture your health, I
know you’re going to do it and I’m so excited that the journey starts today and
that this book will be a part of it for you.



PRE-FF4W CHECKLIST
To help things go smoothly, here is our list of appliances that you’ll use
throughout the weeks along with shelf-stable ingredients that might be hard to
find, depending on your location, and therefore need to be ordered ahead of time.


□   Slow cooker (see Notes)
□   Blender
□   Medium saucepan
□   Small saucepan
□   Rimmed baking sheet
□   Food processor (see Notes)
□   Muffin tin
□   Large skillet
□   Glass meal-prep containers
□   Mix of glass storage containers, for leftovers
□   Prep bowls, mix of sizes


Foods
□ Dried shiitake mushrooms
□ 2-ounce package kombu sheets
□ Matcha powder (organic ceremonial grade)
□ Nutritional yeast
□ Gluten-free flour (Bob’s Red Mill 1:1 and King Arthur Flour All-Purpose
  Gluten-Free Flour Mix are Week 1–approved)
□ Garlic-infused olive oil
□ Mushroom powder (see Mushroom Hot Cocoa for more)
□ Wakame seaweed


Herbs & Spices
□ Ground ginger
□ Ground cinnamon
□ Ground nutmeg
□ Salt (see Notes)
□ Freshly ground black pepper
□ Dried oregano
□ Dried basil
□ Dried parsley
□ Crushed red pepper flakes, optional
□ Ground turmeric
□ Chili powder
□ Smoked paprika
□ Yellow curry powder
□ Garam masala
□ Ground cumin
□ Vanilla extract
□ Ground coriander
□ Ground cayenne, optional
□ Dried thyme
□ Dried mustard
□ Dried cardamom
□ Garlic powder


Notes
              Slow cooker is only used in the recipe for Biome Broth, with an
              option for stove-top.
              If you don’t own a food processor but have a good blender, then
              you can use that in the recipes that call for a food processor,
              though you will likely have to remove the top, scrape down the
              sides, and blend a few times to get the same results.
              Since a plant-based diet can be low in iodine, we recommend
               using iodized salt to ensure you are getting a source of this vital
               nutrient. But if you’re fermenting, make sure to use non-iodized
               salt.



Sunday Prep
Each week will begin with a meal-prep day to help cut down on cooking time
later in the week. Spending a few hours at the start of the week will ensure that
you’re able to follow through with the twenty-eight-day meal plan, even when
things get busy.
   At the start of each week, you’ll see a prep section highlighting the
recommended and optional cooking steps. We’ve created this plan with
efficiency in mind; that’s why you’ll see certain breakfasts, snacks, and desserts
repeated throughout the plan. These are all items that are either simple to put
together or can last for weeks at a time.



Drinks, Snacks, and Dessert
Being Fiber Fueled isn’t about living in deprivation. It’s about enjoying
delicious food in abundance and still getting the results you want. With that in
mind, every week we’ll be offering a drink, two snacks, and two desserts to
round out your culinary experience. You can sprinkle them into your routine as
often as you desire. Keep in mind that if you love the Coconut Oat Balls from
Week 1, for example, you shouldn’t hesitate to bring it back again in Week 3. As
long as you don’t jump ahead, you are totally free to reuse the recipes that you
enjoy. Likewise, if you like having the same snack or dessert most days, that’s
fine, too!



Quick-Fix Recipes
Life can get the best of us sometimes. Some days you come home and just want
to throw on your sweatpants and enjoy an easy peasy dinner that requires next to
no effort. I totally get it! That’s why we have Quick-Fix recommendations for
each week. If you ever decide that you need something simple, you can opt for a
Quick-Fix in place of the planned meal.
Week 1
Okay, folks, after all that reading and preparation, we are officially under way.
You’re going to be pushing yourself—trying new foods, new flavors, new
cooking techniques. Embrace the challenge and share your experience online
under the hashtag #fiberfueled4weeks. I’ll be keeping an eye out for you and
can’t wait to cheer you on!
  Remember, feel free to make adjustments as necessary to fit your tastes or
your particular lifestyle. Don’t forget to keep track of which recipes are your
favorites, which you can do without, and if any meals make you sensitive.

WEEK 1 SHOPPING LIST
Produce
□ 1 medium piece fresh ginger
□ 7 large lemons
□ 6 large red bell peppers
□ 1 ounce dried shiitake mushrooms
□ 1 pound carrots
□ 1 pound celery hearts
□ 1 pint cherry tomatoes
□ One 5-ounce bag spinach leaves
□ 3 kiwis
□ 1 pound strawberries
□ 2 bananas
□ One 10-ounce package leafy salad greens
□ 2 beets
□ One 100-gram container broccoli sprouts
□ 1 bunch fresh parsley
□ 1 bunch fresh basil
□ 1 large avocado
□ 1 large eggplant
□ 2 zucchini
□ 7 Roma tomatoes
□ 1 small fennel bulb
□ 1 large pineapple
□ 1 small bunch fresh chives
□   1 bunch kale (lacinato or curly)
□   1 jalapeño
□   1 bunch fresh cilantro
□   1 lime
□   1 pint blueberries
□   3 large sweet potatoes
□   2 parsnips
□   6 large radishes
□   2 bunches scallions
□   1 head romaine lettuce
□   One 5-ounce container arugula
□   1 red chile pepper
□   1 head broccoli
□   2 heads bok choy
□   1 pound oyster mushrooms
□   2 large oranges
□   2 large salad tomatoes


Cupboard
□ One 28-ounce jar peanut butter
□ One 16-ounce container white miso paste
□ One 16-ounce jar organic sunflower oil
□ One 8-ounce container unsweetened cocoa powder
□ One 28-ounce jar almond butter
□ One 8-ounce bag unsweetened coconut flakes
□ One 64-ounce container almond milk
□ One 16-ounce bag chia seeds
□ One 16-ounce bag hemp seeds
□ One 16-ounce bag ground flaxseed
□ Two 15-ounce cans chickpeas
□ One 5-ounce jar sunflower kernels
□ One 15-ounce jar tahini
□ One 15-ounce can brown lentils
□ One 24-ounce bag yellow cornmeal
□ One 8-ounce bag unsweetened coconut flakes
□ One 8-ounce bag dates
□ One 4-ounce box wild rice
□ One 30-ounce loaf sourdough bread
□   One 8-ounce package tempeh
□   One 16-ounce bag whole almonds
□   Taco-size (small) corn tortillas (4)
□   1 pound firm tofu, packed in water
□   One 8-ounce package rice noodles
□   One 18-ounce container rolled oats
□   One 3-ounce bag pepitas
□   One 2.24-ounce can sliced black olives
□   One 8-ounce package gluten-free pasta of choice
□   One 8-ounce package quinoa
□   One 15-ounce can coconut milk
□   One 8-ounce package brown rice
□   One 32-ounce container vegetable broth
□   One 3-ounce can bamboo shoots
□   One 20-ounce package arborio rice
□   One 10-ounce bag chopped walnuts


Pantry Staples (If you don’t have these on hand, grab them ahead of time)
□ 100% maple syrup
□ Balsamic vinegar
□ Olive oil
□ Ground cumin
□ Sea salt
□ Ground black pepper
□ Crushed red pepper flakes
□ Dried kombu
□ Turmeric
□ Tamari
□ Nutritional yeast
□ Vanilla extract
□ Red wine vinegar
□ Rice wine vinegar
□ Pickling spice (or mustard seeds, cloves, and whole peppercorns)
□ Apple cider vinegar
□ Dried oregano
□ Dried basil
□ Chili powder
□ Smoked paprika
□   Cayenne pepper
□   Italian scasoning
□   Toasted sesame oil
□   Cornstarch or arrowroot powder
□   Ground ginger
□   Ground cinnamon
□   Ground nutmeg
□   Dried cranberries, optional
□   Yellow curry powder
□   Garam masala powder
□   Baking powder
□   Baking soda


Week 1—Drinks, Snacks, and Dessert
Remember, these recipes are to be enjoyed whenever the moment feels right.
Drink Recipe: Lemon-Ginger Tea
Snack Recipe #1: Muhammara Dip with carrots and cucumbers
Snack Recipe #2: Miso Biome Sipper
Dessert Recipe #1: Coconut Oat Balls
Dessert Recipe #2: Zesty Lemon Chia Pudding


Week 1—Quick-Fix Menu
When the going gets tough, no worries. Just opt for one of these recipes for
super simple meals and snacks.

     Friendly reminder: Berries can always be substituted for the dessert option if you prefer. To
     keep the berries low FODMAP this week, we recommend no more than ¼ cup blueberries or
        10 strawberries at a time. More than that or other types of berries are considered high
       FODMAP for Week 1. More than 10 almonds is considered high FODMAP for Week 1.



Quick-Fix Breakfast: Superfood Smoothie
Quick-Fix Lunch: Muhammara Sandwich
Quick-Fix Dinner: Wild Biome Super Soup
Quick-Fix Snack: 10 almonds
Quick-Fix Dessert: ¼ cup blueberries or 10 strawberries*
Week 1 Meal Prep


Week 1 Recommended Prep
Supercharged Roasted Roots
Biome Broth
Roasted Italian Medley
Oil-Free Orange Dressing
Muhammara Dip
Crispy Oat Granola
Coconut Oat Balls
Zesty Lemon Chia Pudding


Week 1 Optional Prep
Creamy Cilantro Sauce
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast
Tempeh Taco Filling

DAY 1 (USUALLY SUNDAY)
Friendly reminder: You can always substitute fruit for the snack or add extra
fruit to your day.

     Meal        Recipe                                                      Plant
                                                                             Points
     Breakfast   Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge with Lemon-Ginger Tea        8
     Lunch       The Daily Salad + Supercharged Roasted Roots + Oil-Free     12
                 Orange Dressing
     Dinner      Plant-Powered Polenta Ragu                                  8



DAY 2

     Meal        Recipe                                       Plant Points
     Breakfast   Creamy Coconut Pudding with Pineapple        4
     Lunch       Wild Biome Super Soup                        7+
     Dinner      Tempeh Tacos                                 5+



DAY 3
    Meal        Recipe                                                           Plant
                                                                                 Points
    Breakfast   Superfood Smoothie with Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast            9+
    Lunch       Muhammara Sandwich                                               7
    Dinner      Nourishing Tomato Noodle Soup with salad of leftover             5–8
                Supercharged Roasted Roots, lettuce, and Oil-Free Orange
                Dressing



DAY 4

    Meal        Recipe                                       Plant Points
    Breakfast   Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge               6
    Lunch       Tempeh Taco Salad                            5+
    Dinner      Pesto Pasta with Roasted Italian Medley      11



DAY 5

    Meal        Recipe                                                          Plant
                                                                                Points
    Breakfast   Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast                                   3–5
    Lunch       The Daily Salad + Oil-Free Orange Dressing + sourdough toast    13–18
                and muhammara spread
    Dinner      Back-Pocket Stir-Fry                                            7



DAY 6

    Meal        Recipe                                                         Plant
                                                                               Points
    Breakfast   Superfood Smoothie Bowl with nut butter drizzle and Crispy     12
                Oat Granola
    Lunch       Leftover Pesto Pasta with Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad            11–13
    Dinner      Curry Tofu Bok Choy                                            7–11



DAY 7

    Meal        Recipe                              Plant Points
    Breakfast   Gluten-Free Pancakes                2+
    Lunch       Leftover Back-Pocket Stir-Fry       7
Dinner   Mushroom Risotto   5
BREAKFAST


Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge
This super seedy breakfast porridge is packed with ALA-rich hemp and chia
seeds. While the ingredient list looks long, it’s mostly spices and flavorings. If
you have pumpkin pie spice on hand, you can use that instead of the ginger,
cinnamon, and nutmeg.
   For those who prefer a sweeter porridge, add maple syrup as desired. We like
this best with fresh berries and a drizzle of almond butter on top.
Makes 2 servings
⅔ cup rolled oats
½ cup unsweetened almond milk
2 tablespoons raw pepitas, roughly chopped
Pinch ground ginger
Pinch ground cinnamon
Pinch ground nutmeg
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
1 tablespoon almond butter, plus more for serving
2 teaspoons chia seeds
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
100% maple syrup (optional)
Berries, for serving
Bring the oats and ⅔ cup water to a boil in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat. Reduce the heat to low and stir in the almond milk, pepitas, ginger,
cinnamon, and nutmeg. Cook, stirring occasionally, for about 5 minutes, until
the oats are tender.
   Remove from the heat and stir in the hemp seeds, almond butter, chia seeds,
and vanilla. Taste, adding maple syrup as desired for a sweeter porridge.
   Serve with berries and additional almond butter drizzle, if desired.
6 PLANT POINTS
Creamy Coconut Pudding with Pineapple
We love the tropical pairing of pineapple and coconut, though other Week 1–
friendly topping options include 30 raspberries or a heaping ¼ cup of
blueberries.
Serves 2
2 cups unsweetened almond milk
¼ cup chia seeds
2 tablespoons ground flaxseed
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup (optional)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons shredded, unsweetened coconut
2 cups sliced pineapple
1 date, chopped
Place the almond milk, chia seeds, flax meal, maple syrup, if using, and vanilla
in a large mason jar with a lid and shake vigorously to combine. Place in the
fridge for 20 minutes, then remove and shake again. Place back in the fridge for
at least 30 minutes or up to overnight.
   When ready to serve, divide into two bowls, stir in the coconut, and top with
pineapple and chopped date.

Low FODMAP Option:
Decrease the total quantity of pineapple to 1 cup.
Dates are a high FODMAP food, so in Week 1, limit your serving size to ⅓
chopped date per serving. In Week 2, increase your serving size to ½ date. After
Week 3, if dates are not a trigger food, you can consume a full date.
Packing Tip:
Make this in your favorite glass container with a lid in the evening, add the
toppings in the morning, and pack this to take with you on busy mornings!
4 PLANT POINTS
Superfood Smoothie, with Bowl Option
We call this a “superfood” smoothie for good reason—it’s packed with all of the
good stuff: ALA-rich hemp seeds, spinach, broccoli sprouts, berries, and
satisfying peanut butter. If you prefer your smoothie on the sweeter side, you
may need a touch of maple syrup for Weeks 1 and 2. From there, feel free to add
in more berries or kiwi and omit the sweetener altogether.
Serves 1
1 cup almond milk
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
½ cup spinach leaves
Small handful broccoli sprouts
1 kiwi, skin removed
5 medium strawberries
2 tablespoons peanut butter
½ frozen banana
1 to 2 teaspoons 100% maple syrup (optional)
Place all ingredients in a blender and puree until very smooth and creamy.
Depending on the power of your blender, you may need to add more liquid.
   To make a smoothie bowl, reduce the liquid by half (use ½ cup almond milk),
then blend as directed. Divide the contents into two bowls and drizzle with
peanut butter and top with more berries, if desired. Garnish with more fresh fruit,
seeds, nut butter, and Crispy Oat Granola.
Packing Tip:
Place the smoothie or bowl in a mason jar with a lid or leak-proof container
with a lid. For the bowl, pack toppings in a separate leak-proof container, then
combine once ready to eat.

Low FODMAP Option:
Unripe bananas are lower in FODMAPs than ripe bananas. Half a ripe banana or
1 medium unripe banana are both low FODMAP. Use ½ banana if you are
sensitive to fructose.
6 PLANT POINTS
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast
While we are big fans of sourdough, this sweet potato version is a nice way to
mix up French toast. We’re serving it with almond butter and blueberries, but the
topping choices are endless after Week 1. This recipe also includes make-ahead
prep for parbaking the sweet potatoes ahead of time, then popping them into a
toaster when ready to eat.
   You’ll need a sharp knife to cut the potatoes into slabs, or you can use a
mandoline for more uniform slices.
Makes 10 or 11 slices
1 large sweet potato, washed and dried
2 tablespoons almond butter
20 blueberries
Preheat the oven to 350°F. Place a wire rack on a large rimmed baking sheet and
set aside.
   Trim both ends from the sweet potato using a knife, then slice the potato
lengthwise into ¼-inch-thick slabs using a knife or mandoline.
   Place the slabs onto the wire rack (or directly onto the baking sheet) in a
single layer and place in the middle of the oven. Cook for 15 to 20 minutes, until
the potatoes are tender but not fully cooked, checking every 5 minutes to make
sure they don’t burn. Thinner potatoes will need less cooking time and thicker
potatoes will need more. If you aren’t using a wire rack, flip the potatoes
halfway through.
   Remove from the oven and allow to cool completely on the wire rack, then
transfer to an airtight container and store in the fridge for up to 4 days.
   When ready to serve, place the sweet potato slices (about 2 slices is a good
serving size) in a toaster or toaster oven on the medium setting and toast until
hot and the edges are crispy (the cook time required will depend on your
toaster). Serve with almond butter and blueberries.

Low FODMAP Option:
For the first week, limit your sweet potato portion size to ½ cup (4 ounces). This
will keep the sweet potato in a low FODMAP portion size.
Supercharge It!
Add a dash of cinnamon, a sprinkle of unsweetened coconut flakes, or even a
few hemp seeds on top of this toast for more Plant Points and nutrients.
3 PLANT POINTS
Crispy Oat Granola
This granola is the perfect topper for smoothies and smoothie bowls. We also
love noshing on this crispy, subtly sweet granola with a touch of plant-based
milk or on its own. While the cranberries are an optional add-in, we are obsessed
with their tart, sweet flavor and chewy texture!
Makes 4¼ cups
2 cups rolled oats
1 cup unsweetened, shredded coconut
1 cup chopped walnuts
2 tablespoons chia seeds
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
2 tablespoons ground flaxseed
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
¾ teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons organic sunflower oil
¼ cup 100% maple syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
½ cup dried cranberries (optional)
Preheat the oven to 250°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment.
   In a large bowl, combine the oats, coconut, walnuts, chia seeds, hemp seeds,
flaxseed, cinnamon, and salt.
   In a small saucepan over medium heat, whisk the sunflower oil into the maple
syrup. Bring to a simmer, then remove from the heat and add the vanilla.
   Add the syrup mixture to the oat ingredients and mix thoroughly. Spread the
granola in a single layer on the prepared baking sheet. Bake for 90 minutes,
stirring every 15 minutes, until golden brown.
   Cool completely, then stir in the dried cranberries, if using. Transfer to an
airtight container and store for several weeks in the fridge, or in the freezer for
up to 3 months.
Make-Ahead Tips:
This dish makes quite a bit. We suggest making this at the start of Week 1 and
enjoying it throughout the meal plan. Store in an airtight container to prevent it
from drying out.
Low FODMAP Option:
1 tablespoon dried cranberries per serving is low FODMAP.
6 PLANT POINTS
LUNCH


The Daily Salad
We call this the daily salad because we believe in the power of eating raw
vegetables every single day, and what better way than a Fiber Fueled salad? If
you’re looking for a filling, satisfying, and easy-to-throw-together option, this is
it. We call for pickled beets in this recipe. They’re low FODMAP even though
plain beets are fairly high.
Serves 2
Salad
4 cups chopped leafy greens
½ cup Quick-Pickled Beets (recipe follows), or store-bought
½ cup cooked chickpeas
¼ cup sunflower seeds
Handful broccoli sprouts
1 medium carrot, shredded
10 cherry tomatoes, sliced
Oil-Free Orange Dressing
¼ cup freshly squeezed orange juice
2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
2 tablespoons tahini
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
Supercharged Roasted Roots (optional; recipe follows), for serving
Make the salad: In a large bowl, toss together the greens, pickled beets,
chickpeas, sunflower seeds, sprouts, carrots, tomatoes, and any other
Supercharge toppings, if using. Set aside.
   Make the dressing: Whisk together the orange juice, vinegar, tahini, salt, and
pepper in a small bowl or mason jar until smooth. Starting with 1 tablespoon at a
time, whisk in water until your desired consistency is reached (the dressing
should be pourable but not runny). Add salt and pepper, as desired. If using later,
the dressing will keep in the fridge for up to 5 days.
  When ready to serve, drizzle each salad with ¼ cup dressing, toss well, and
add salt and pepper to taste.
Supercharge It!
Add 1 cup Supercharged Roasted Roots, chopped parsley, and cubed, baked
tofu. After Week 2, you can top with ½ avocado.
9 PLANT POINTS
 Quick-Pickled Beets
2 cups steamed, sliced beets
¼ cup plus 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup
1 tablespoon pickling spice (see Note)
Place the cooked beets, vinegar, maple syrup, and pickling spice in a small
saucepan and bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to a simmer, cover,
and let cook for 3 minutes. Remove from the heat and let sit for 30 minutes.


Refrigerate the beets for up to 1 week in the fridge.


Note: If you don’t have pickling spice, you can use a pinch of mustard seeds, 2
or 3 whole cloves, and a pinch of whole peppercorns instead.
Supercharged Roasted Roots
This topping is designed to supercharge your meals wherever you want a little
fiber boost. Add a handful to salads, Nourishing Buddha Bowls, or Tofu
Scramble Bowls, or just enjoy them on their own.
   This mix is perfect for Week 1, but the technique can be used on almost any
vegetable out there, though cooking times may need to be adjusted.
Serves 4
2 cups cubed sweet potato
2 parsnips, chopped
6 large radishes, chopped
1 tablespoon olive oil, or garlic-infused olive oil
2 tablespoons vegetable broth
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground pepper
Preheat the oven to 425°F.
   Toss the sweet potato, parsnips, radishes, olive oil, broth, salt, and pepper
together in a large bowl until well combined. Place on a rimmed baking sheet in
a single layer (you may need to use two, depending on size) and cover with foil.
   Roast for 35 minutes, or until mostly soft. Remove from the oven, remove the
foil, and stir. Return to the oven for 10 more minutes, or until the edges become
lightly crisp.
3 PLANT POINTS
Wild Biome Super Soup
Wild rice and chickpeas make this hearty soup delicious and satisfying. While
you can enjoy this soup any time of year, it’s very comforting and perfect for a
cold and rainy day.
Makes 2 servings
1 teaspoon olive oil
2 carrots, chopped
1 celery stalk, chopped
2 tablespoons fresh chives, chopped
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
⅛ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
2½ cups Biome Broth
⅓ cup wild rice
½ cup chickpeas
1 cup kale, stems removed and roughly chopped
In a medium saucepan, heat the olive oil over medium-high heat. Add the
carrots, celery, chives, salt, and pepper. Cook for 3 to 5 minutes, until the
vegetables are crisp-tender.
  Add in the broth, rice, and ½ cup water. Bring the mixture to a boil, then
cover and reduce the heat to low. Simmer for about 40 minutes, until the rice has
softened.
  Mix in the chickpeas and kale and cook until the kale is just wilted, about 5
minutes. Add salt and pepper to taste.
Packing Tip:
Pack in a thermos to enjoy warm at work or place in a leak-proof container and
warm right before serving. We like Bklyn Bento jars, which come with a bamboo
spoon, or Lillie Home stainless-steel thermoses.
Supercharge It!
Serve this with a side of sourdough bread and the Muhammara Dip you have
made from the meal plan. Top with freshly chopped scallions.
7 PLANT POINTS
Muhammara Sandwich
To pack this sandwich for lunch, pack the toast, roasted Italian vegetables,
spinach, and dip separately, then combine right before eating. We enjoy this as
an open-faced sandwich.
Makes 1 sandwich
Leftover Muhammara Dip
Leftover Roasted Italian Medley
Sourdough bread
Fresh spinach leaves
Right before serving, toast the bread and warm the dip and vegetables. Spread
the muhammara dip on both pieces of the bread, then layer with vegetables and
spinach leaves. Eat as an open-faced sandwich, or assemble, slice, and enjoy.
7 PLANT POINTS
Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad
This is one of our favorite ways to enjoy kale! The avocado–almond butter
dressing is creamy and bursting with flavor. Simple to make, filled with flavor
and texture, and brimming with plant-powered nutrients! We use this one as a
side dish for multiple meals throughout the four-week plan.
Serves 2
1 heaping cup kale (dinosaur is best), tough stems removed and chopped
3 teaspoons low-sodium tamari
1 heaping cup spinach
2 tablespoons chives
¼ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
¼ avocado, mashed
2 tablespoons almond butter
½ stalk celery, chopped
2 tablespoons walnuts, roughly chopped (optional)
¼ cup chopped scallions (green parts only) (optional)
In a medium bowl, drizzle the kale with 1 teaspoon tamari and massage with
your hands to soften and break down the kale. Add the spinach, chives, salt, and
pepper and toss together once more.
   In a separate small bowl, mash the avocado with the almond butter and whisk
in the remaining 2 teaspoons of tamari to thin.
   Pour the avocado mixture over the kale and combine thoroughly with your
hands or with tongs, massaging to coat every piece.
   Add the celery, walnuts, and scallions and serve.

FODMAP Alternative Suggestions:
If you can tolerate a higher portion than ½ cup, increase your serving of kale, as
this recipe makes a lot of dressing!
Make-Ahead Tips:
This salad tastes good a day after making, but not much longer. If you plan on
making a portion to enjoy now and enjoying the second portion later, only dress
half the greens with half of the dressing and toppings. Store the remaining kale,
spinach, dressing, chopped celery, walnuts, and scallions separately until ready
to enjoy.
5 PLANT POINTS
DINNER


Plant-Powered Polenta Ragu
Creamy polenta is stick-to-your-ribs comfort food, especially when combined
with our quick ragu of Italian vegetables and lentils. After Week 1, try this ragu
with Pepita Parmesan, a nutty parm that’s delicious on everything from pasta to
polenta to popcorn.
Serves 2
Quick Ragu
2 teaspoons olive oil, garlic-infused olive oil, or vegetable broth
1 cup chopped tomatoes
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 cup canned lentils
2 cups Roasted Italian Medley
½ teaspoon dried oregano, plus more to taste
½ teaspoon dried basil, plus more to taste
Crushed red pepper flakes (optional)
Polenta
1½ cups plain almond milk
½ cup cornmeal
½ teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper
Chopped parsley, for serving
Chopped fresh basil, for serving
Make the ragu: Heat a medium saucepan over medium heat and add the olive oil.
Add in the tomatoes and a pinch of salt and black pepper. Cook, stirring often,
for about 10 minutes, until the tomatoes have broken down. Add the lentils,
Roasted Italian Medley, oregano, basil, and red pepper flakes, if using. Cook,
stirring occasionally, for 10 minutes, or until thickened. Taste as you go and add
more salt, pepper, and dried herbs as desired.
   Make the polenta: Whisk together ½ cup water and the almond milk in a
medium saucepan over medium heat. When bubbles start to surface, whisk in the
cornmeal and salt. Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 10 to 15 minutes,
until thickened. Taste as you go and add more salt and pepper to taste.
  To serve, divide the polenta into two bowls and top with the ragu. Garnish
with fresh chopped parsley and basil.
8 PLANT POINTS
Tempeh Tacos and Taco Salad
The tempeh taco filling and creamy cilantro sauce are designed to do double-
duty in both the tacos and taco salad. Save time by making the entire batch, then
portioning half to save for later in the week.
Serves 4
Tempeh Taco Filling
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 ounces tempeh, finely chopped
1 tablespoon chili powder
2 teaspoons smoked paprika
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 cup canned lentils, drained
Creamy Cilantro Sauce
1 jalapeño, roughly chopped
½ bunch cilantro
¼ cup slivered almonds
Zest and juice of 1 lime
1 teaspoon salt
For Tacos
4 corn tortillas
Shredded lettuce, black olives, chopped tomatoes, scallions, and cilantro, for
   serving
For Salad
4 cups shredded lettuce
½ cup chopped tomatoes
⅓ cup sliced black olives
2 sliced scallions (green parts only)
⅓ cup chopped cilantro
Make the taco filling: Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the
tempeh. Use a wooden spoon to break it into small pieces, then add in the chili
powder, smoked paprika, salt, and cayenne pepper. Cook for about 10 minutes,
until the tempeh is softened, adding a splash of broth or water if the tempeh
sticks to the pan or gets too dry. Add the lentils and stir to combine and warm
through.
   Make the creamy cilantro sauce: Place the jalapeño, cilantro, almonds, lime
zest, lime juice, ½ cup water, and the salt into a blender and puree until creamy
and smooth. The consistency should be similar to a thick salad dressing. Add
more water, 1 tablespoon at a time, if the dressing is too thick.
   Assemble the tacos: Right before serving, warm the tortillas. Add half of the
tempeh filling to the corn tortillas and top with shredded lettuce, tomatoes,
olives, scallions, cilantro, and dressing. Reserve the remaining half of the filling
for taco salad later in the week.
   Assemble the taco salad: Toss together the lettuce, tomatoes, olives, scallions,
and cilantro and divide into two bowls. Top with the remaining tempeh taco
filling and drizzle with the cilantro dressing.
Make-Ahead Tip:
Prep the tempeh taco filling and creamy cilantro sauce ahead of time, up to 3
days before serving. Portion half of the tempeh taco filling and creamy cilantro
dressing to use later in the week for Tempeh Taco Salad.

Low FODMAP Option:
Chili powder may contain garlic, so make sure to read the ingredient list and pay
attention to how you feel after this meal.
5+ PLANT POINTS
Nourishing Tomato Noodle Soup
Tomato noodle soup for this soul. This low FODMAP soup is comforting,
nourishing, and just plain delicious.
Serves 2
3 cups Biome Broth, plus more as needed
1 scallion (green part only), sliced
2 teaspoons freshly grated ginger
1 Roma tomato, finely diced
1 tablespoon tamari
6 ounces firm tofu, drained, lightly pressed (see Note), and finely cubed
½ teaspoon ground turmeric
5 ounces rice noodles
2 teaspoons miso paste
1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil (optional)
Supercharged Roasted Roots (optional), for serving
Heat 2 tablespoons of the broth in a medium saucepan over medium heat. Add in
the scallion greens, ginger, tomato, and tamari and cook for about 10 minutes,
until the tomato is well broken down. Add a splash or two of broth as needed.
   Add the tofu and cook 1 to 2 more minutes, stirring occasionally to prevent
sticking. Add the turmeric and the remaining broth, then bring to a low boil. Let
simmer for 10 minutes for the flavors to develop.
   Reduce the heat to a simmer, then add in the rice noodles. Cook for another 2
or 3 minutes, until the noodles are tender and cooked through.
   Turn off the heat and stir in the miso. Drizzle with sesame oil, if using, and
top with the roasted roots to serve, if desired.
Supercharge It!
Top with 1 slice toasted nori, cut into strips, sesame seeds, and sliced scallion
greens.
5 PLANT POINTS



Note: To press tofu, slice into slabs, then wrap in clean kitchen towels or paper
towels. Place on a rimmed baking sheet, then cover with a heavy object, such as
food cans or a skillet. Let sit for 10 minutes, until much of the water is removed.
Pesto Pasta
This hearty pasta dinner comes together quickly, using the leftover Roasted
Italian Medley from earlier in the week.
Serves 4
Arugula-Walnut Pesto
3 cups packed arugula
½ cup lightly toasted walnuts
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
¼ cup vegetable broth or water
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
1 tablespoon olive oil (optional)
8 ounces dried gluten-free pasta
2 cups Roasted Italian Medley (recipe follows)
Make the pesto: Place the arugula, walnuts, and nutritional yeast in the base of a
food processor and blend until very finely chopped. With the motor running, add
in the lemon juice, vegetable broth, salt, and pepper. Add more salt and pepper
to taste. Drizzle in the olive oil, if using, and set aside.
   Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. Add the pasta and cook until just al
dente according to package directions. Reserve ½ cup of pasta water and drain
the pasta.
   Place the pasta back into the pot along with the pesto. Toss, adding splashes of
pasta water as needed to coat the pasta. Stir in the leftover Roasted Italian
Medley and serve. If you prefer your pasta a little spicy, enjoy this with crushed
red pepper flakes.

Low FODMAP Options:
Ancient Harvest and NOW Foods both have great quinoa pasta. Chickpea pasta
is also good, but has moderate FODMAP with over a 1-cup serving.
If tolerated after Week 3, add in 1 or 2 garlic cloves to the pesto.
If tolerated after Week 2, top with Pepita Parmesan.
6 PLANT POINTS
 Roasted Italian Medley
This one-pan side dish is designed to make meal prep for Week 1 even easier.
You’ll use these vegetables over and over again in different ways: in the Plant-
Powered Polenta Ragu, the Muhammara Sandwich, and the Pesto Pasta.
Makes 6 cups
1 large eggplant, cubed
2 medium zucchini, diced
1 red bell pepper, seeded and cubed
2 Roma tomatoes, diced
1 small fennel (1½ cups), fronds removed and diced
1 teaspoon dried Italian seasoning
¼ cup vegetable broth
2 to 3 teaspoons olive oil
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes (optional)
Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   In a large bowl, toss together the eggplant, zucchini, bell pepper, Roma
tomatoes, fennel, Italian seasoning, vegetable broth, olive oil, salt, black pepper,
and red pepper flakes, if using. Place in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet
(you may need two baking sheets, depending on the size), then place on the top
rack of the oven.
   Cook for 35 to 40 minutes, depending on the size of your vegetables, until the
vegetables are very tender.
   Keep in the fridge for up to 6 days. Enjoy any extras as is, on salads, or
combined with cooked whole-grain pasta.

Low FODMAP Options:
Fennel has moderate mannitols and fructans. Less than ½ cup is considered low
FODMAP.
5 PLANT POINTS
Back-Pocket Stir-Fry
Simplicity wins here. This stir-fry is made for Week 1 but simple enough to mix
and match with other vegetables after the first week. Instead of a traditional
protein source, we’re serving this over quinoa, a pseudo-grain that packs in 8
grams of protein and 5 grams of fiber per cup. Enjoy leftovers for lunch later in
the week.
Serves 4
⅓ cup tamari
¼ cup rice wine vinegar
2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil
2 teaspoons cornstarch or arrowroot
¼ cup Biome Broth or water
2 tablespoons freshly grated ginger
1 red chile, seeded and minced (optional)
4 scallions (green parts only), sliced
2 cups broccoli florets only, chopped
4 carrots, sliced on the bias
1 red bell pepper, sliced
2 cups bok choy, sliced, leaves and stems separated
8 ounces oyster mushrooms, sliced
4 cups cooked quinoa, for serving
In a small bowl, whisk together the tamari, vinegar, sesame oil, and cornstarch
until smooth. Set aside.
   Heat the broth in a large skillet or wok over medium-high heat. Add the
ginger, chili, if using, and sliced scallions. Cook, stirring often, until fragrant,
about 1 minute.
   Add the broccoli, carrots, bell pepper, and bok choy stems and cook, stirring
often, for 5 to 7 minutes, until the vegetables are bright in color and slightly
tender. Add in the bok choy leaves and oyster mushrooms and stir together for
30 seconds.
   Add the tamari mixture to the wok. Cook, stirring often, until the sauce has
thickened and the vegetables are cooked through.
   Serve over cooked quinoa.
Low FODMAP Option:
After Week 2, add 1 or 2 minced garlic cloves to the tamari mixture.
7 PLANT POINTS
Curry Tofu Bok Choy
This simple dinner combines two of our favorite plant-powered foods: calcium-
and iron-rich tofu and bok choy. Baby bok choy is more tender than the bigger
bok choy, so if you prefer a milder vegetable, select that one instead.
Makes 2 servings
1¼ cups plus 2 tablespoons vegetable broth or Biome Broth, plus more as
   needed
½ cup canned coconut milk
1 tablespoon yellow curry powder
1 tablespoon garam masala powder
2 scallions (green parts only), thinly sliced
1 tablespoon freshly grated ginger
1 tablespoon tamari
3 cups bok choy, leaves and stems separated
3 ounces canned bamboo shoots (rinsed)
7 ounces firm tofu, pressed and cubed (see this page)
1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil
1¼ cups cooked brown rice, for serving
In a medium bowl, whisk together 1¼ cups vegetable broth, the coconut milk,
yellow curry powder, and garam masala until the spices are thoroughly mixed in.
Set aside.
  Heat the remaining 2 tablespoons broth in a large skillet or wok over medium-
high heat until shimmering. Add the scallions, ginger, and tamari. Stir for about
1 minute, until the mixture is fragrant and the ginger is mostly broken down.
  Add in the bok choy stems and bamboo shoots and sauté for about 5 minutes,
until softened. If you need more liquid, add in a splash or two of the broth.
  Toss the tofu with the sesame oil and set aside. Add to the wok and stir for 30
seconds to incorporate with the bok choy and bamboo shoots.
  Reduce the heat to medium-low and add the coconut milk mixture and
remaining bok choy leaves. Cover and reduce the heat to low. Let simmer for
about 10 minutes, until the sauce is thickened and vegetables are tender and
cooked through. Serve over cooked rice.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Chop the scallions and bok choy prior to cooking. Store in a sealed container in
the fridge. This entire dish can be made ahead of time, cooled, and stored in a
sealed container in the fridge, then reheated when you are ready to enjoy!

Low FODMAP Options:
Read the ingredient label and make sure your curry powder and garam masala do
not contain garlic or onion.
Supercharge It!
Top with chopped cilantro, sesame seeds, and/or bean sprouts.
7 PLANT POINTS
Mushroom Risotto
Yes, risotto takes a little more time than other meals to make, but the constant
stirring is like meditation to us. Put on a podcast (Plant Proof and Party in My
Plants are my faves!) and enjoy standing over the stove, creating a warm bowl
of delicious, creamy rice. Thirty minutes later you are rewarded with a rich,
luxurious risotto dish without any cream, cheese, or butter. You’re welcome!
Serves 4
4 cups Biome Broth or FODMAP-friendly vegetable broth
2 tablespoons garlic-infused olive oil (see Note)
8 ounces oyster mushrooms, chopped
Salt
1¼ cups arborio or other short-grain rice
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
3 tablespoons nutritional yeast
Fresh parsley or fresh chives, chopped, for serving
In a small saucepot, heat the vegetable broth over medium heat. Once
simmering, reduce the heat to low to keep warm.
   While the broth is heating, heat a separate large saucepan over medium heat.
Once hot, add in 1 tablespoon olive oil and heat until just shimmering, then add
the mushrooms and a pinch of salt. Sauté for about 10 minutes, until tender and
browned. Remove from the pan and set aside.
   Heat the remaining 1 tablespoon of oil in the saucepan and add the rice. Cook,
stirring often, for 1 minute until just lightly toasted. Using a ladle, add in the
warmed vegetable broth, ½ cup at a time, stirring almost constantly, allowing the
rice to absorb all of the liquid. Take care not to boil the mixture, as that will
result in gummy risotto; the heat should be no higher than medium, with the
mixture at a slight simmer.
   Continue to add in the vegetable broth, ½ cup at a time, stirring to incorporate
until the liquid is mostly absorbed before adding in more broth. The whole
process should take about 20 minutes, until the rice is al dente.
   Add the lemon juice, nutritional yeast, and reserved mushrooms, stirring to
combine. Depending on your broth, you likely don’t need any more salt, but
season to taste as desired. Serve with chopped parsley or chives, as desired.
Note: When eating low FODMAP, garlic is avoided because it is high in
fructans. Garlic-infused olive oil has the green light for a low FODMAP diet
because the fructans are not lipid soluble so they will not leach into the oil. Just
make sure to only consume the oil and don’t eat the garlic. Fody Foods makes a
great garlic-infused olive oil or you can make your own. Crush a few garlic
cloves to break the skin—you’ll need about 1 cup of olive oil for 5 to 6 garlic
cloves. Gently heat the oil and garlic over low to medium heat for a few minutes,
then allow the oil to cool. Remove the garlic, then store the oil in the fridge.


Low FODMAP Options:
For a store-bought, low FODMAP vegetable broth, try brands such as Fody
Foods, Savory Choice, or Casa de Santé.
Oyster mushrooms are recommended in Week 1 as they are low FODMAP.
Substitute other mushrooms with caution in Week 1, as they contain mannitol
and fructans.
After Week 2 and if okay with garlic and onions, sauté 1 cup chopped onion and
2 minced garlic cloves in the pan after you remove the mushrooms and before
you add the rice.
5 PLANT POINTS
SNACKS, DESSERTS, AND DRINKS


Lemon-Ginger Tea
We like this lemon-ginger tea as an after-dinner drink. Ginger aids in digestion,
and lemon contains just enough pucker to satisfy any dessert cravings. Feel free
to drink it liberally, whenever you feel it suits you.
Serves 2
1 small ginger knob, sliced into four 1-inch chunks
Juice of 1 large lemon
100% maple syrup or stevia, as desired
In a medium saucepan, simmer 4 cups water and the ginger for 10 to 15 minutes,
or longer, depending on how strong you like your tea.
   Remove from the heat and stir in the lemon juice. Strain, removing the ginger,
and divide the tea between 2 large mugs. Stir in the maple syrup and serve.
   To serve cold: Pour the ginger-water mixture over 4 cups of ice and add the
lemon juice and maple syrup, as desired.
2 PLANT POINTS
Muhammara Dip
Muhammara, made from roasted red peppers, walnuts, cumin, and red pepper
flakes, is a hot pepper dip with Syrian roots. We love this smoky spread with
vegetables and toasted sourdough, and in our Muhammara Sandwich.
Makes about 2½ cups dip
6 large red bell peppers
1 cup raw walnuts, chopped
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ cup freshly squeezed lemon juice
¼ cup balsamic vinegar
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon sea salt, plus more to taste
½ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes (or more, for a spicy dip)
Preheat the oven to 450°F.
   Place the whole bell peppers directly onto a rimmed baking sheet and roast for
25 minutes, turning after 15 minutes, so that the bell peppers are lightly charred
on each side.
   Place the peppers in a large bowl and immediately cover with a kitchen towel
to allow them to steam for at least 10 minutes. This will help the skin soften so
it’s easier to remove.
   Once cool, remove the skin, core, and seeds. Roughly chop and set aside.
   To the base of a food processor, add in the walnuts, olive oil, lemon juice,
vinegar, cumin, salt, and red pepper flakes. Pulse 8 to 10 times to combine. Add
in the roasted peppers and pulse a few more times to combine. You can make
this into a creamy, hummus-like spread or a chunky nut spread. Taste and adjust
as needed, adding more lemon for acidity, chili flakes for spice, balsamic
vinegar for depth, and/or salt.
   This will keep, covered, in the fridge for up to 4 days.
3 PLANT POINTS
Biome Broth
This broth tames inflammation, nourishes your gut, and packs some stellar
antioxidants. We recommend making a batch every Sunday using a slow cooker
for easy prep. As the weeks progress, feel free to add in more aromatics, like
onion and garlic, for a more robust broth. Start with 1 chopped onion and 2
garlic cloves and adjust from there.
   For a quick snack, warm up a cup (or two!) of this broth and stir in a
tablespoon of miso paste until dissolved. Sip as is, or throw in cubed tofu,
chopped scallions, and/or roasted mushrooms and steamed kale.
Makes about 8 cups
1 large piece dried kombu
1 cup chopped carrots
1 cup chopped celery
⅓ cup dried shiitake mushrooms or 1 teaspoon mushroom powder
1-inch piece fresh ginger, sliced
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
2 tablespoons olive oil
3 tablespoons tamari
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
Miso Biome Sipper
2 cups Biome Broth
2 teaspoons freshly grated ginger
2 teaspoons miso paste
Place the kombu, carrots, celery, mushrooms, ginger, nutritional yeast, olive oil,
tamari, turmeric, and 8 cups water in a slow cooker and simmer on low for at
least 6 hours. Alternatively, place in a large stockpot and simmer on low for at
least 2 hours, stirring occasionally.
   Let cool, then strain through a fine-mesh strainer. Divide into glass containers,
placing some in the freezer for use later in the week and some in the fridge for
immediate use. Make sure, if freezing in a glass container, to leave plenty of
room for the liquid to expand. If not, the glass could break!
   To make the miso biome sipper, warm the broth over medium heat, then
remove from the heat and stir in the ginger and miso paste until dissolved, about
30 seconds. Divide into two mugs and sip.
Supercharge It!
Add ½ teaspoon mushroom powder to the biome sipper as you warm the broth.
Top with sliced scallion greens.
6 PLANT POINTS
Coconut Oat Balls
Makes about 14 balls, depending on size
1 cup old-fashioned oats, plus more as needed
⅓ cup unsweetened coconut flakes
⅓ cup peanut butter, plus more as needed
2 tablespoons 100% maple syrup
2 tablespoons chia seeds
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
1 ounce finely chopped dark chocolate
Place the oats, coconut flakes, peanut butter, maple syrup, chia seeds, vanilla,
and cinnamon in the base of a food processor and pulse 10 to 12 times, until just
combined (you can also just mix these ingredients together in a large mixing
bowl until thoroughly combined). If the mixture is too sticky to roll into balls,
add some more oats. If it’s too dry, add in more peanut butter.
   Add the dark chocolate and pulse to just combine.
   Pinch off a 1-tablespoon ball using either a spoon or small cookie scoop. Roll
into a ball, then continue with the rest of the mixture. Store in an airtight
container for 1 week or in the freezer for up to 3 months.

FODMAP notes:
While all of the ingredients here are lower FODMAP, stick to 2 balls per
serving.
4 PLANT POINTS
Zesty Lemon Chia Pudding
This lemon chia pudding is a Fiber Fueled riff on lemon pudding. Who needs
dairy and egg yolks when you have chia seeds? Chia seeds swell when mixed
with liquid, creating a thick, creamy pudding out of lemon juice and almond
milk. For a creamier pudding, swap in canned coconut milk after Week 3.
Makes about 2 cups
1 cup unsweetened almond milk
1 teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest
¼ cup freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 to 2 tablespoons 100% maple syrup
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
Pinch salt
¼ cup chia seeds
In a medium bowl, whisk together the almond milk, lemon zest, lemon juice,
maple syrup, turmeric, and salt. Add the chia seeds and whisk until very well
combined, then place in the fridge for 15 minutes. Remove, whisk together
again, then cover and place back in the fridge to gel at least 2 hours, or
overnight.
  Place in an airtight container and keep in the fridge for up to 7 days.
Make-Ahead Tip:
Make the chia pudding ahead of time. It will keep for up to 1 week in the fridge.
Supercharge It!
Top with berries and up to ½ cup unsweetened shredded coconut. After Week 2,
you can add Whipped Coconut Cream, too.
3 PLANT POINTS

 Whipped Coconut Cream
Serves 4
1 can full fat coconut milk (or coconut cream), placed in the fridge overnight
Carefully open the can and scoop out the top half of the solidified coconut. If
you are using coconut milk, make sure you are only getting the solid coconut,
not the water underneath. You can discard the water or save it for another recipe.
If you are using coconut cream, you will use the whole can.
   Place the solidified coconut in a bowl and whip until creamy, using a hand
mixer or a stand mixer.
1 PLANT POINT
Week 2
One week down! Do you have a favorite recipe so far? How about the Plant
Points—did you get Rock Star status already? We’re going to keep it pretty
gentle in Week 2, but we will introduce some lentils here this week to start
exercising the gut a little bit. There are low FODMAP substitutions available if
you think you need them. Don’t forget about fermented foods! If you’re feeling
bold, go ahead and add one as a garnish to any recipe that feels right to you and
grant yourself an extra Plant Point for your efforts. Make sure to stay connected
to our online community by posting your food pictures to #fiberfueled4weeks.
Remember, we’re all in this together.

WEEK 2 SHOPPING LIST
Produce
□ 1 medium piece fresh ginger
□ 4 large lemons
□ 1 large red bell pepper
□ 1 large green bell pepper
□ 1 ounce dried shiitake mushrooms
□ 1 small onion
□ 1 pound carrots
□ 1 pound celery hearts
□ 1 large baking potato
□ 1 pint cherry tomatoes
□ One 5-ounce bag spinach leaves
□ 1 pound strawberries
□ 3 bananas
□ 1 kiwi
□ One 10-ounce package leafy salad greens
□ 2 beets
□ One 100-gram container broccoli sprouts
□ 1 bunch fresh parsley
□ 1 Thai chili
□ 1 zucchini
□ 1 small bunch fresh chives
□ 3 bunches kale (lacinato or curly)
□   1 jalapeño
□   1 bunch fresh cilantro
□   2 limes
□   1 bunch fresh mint
□   1 pint blueberries
□   3 large sweet potatoes
□   2 bunches scallions
□   1 head romaine lettuce
□   7 large oranges
□   2 large grapefruit
□   3 large salad tomatoes
□   1 small butternut squash
□   One 6-ounce package snow peas
□   1 small head red cabbage


Cupboard
□ One 24-ounce bag gluten-free flour
□ One 64-ounce container almond milk
□ 4 ounces matcha powder (preferably ceremonial matcha)
□ One 8-ounce bag frozen edamame
□ 8 ounces soba noodles
□ Three 15-ounce cans chickpeas
□ 1 small bag oat flour
□ One 15-ounce can pumpkin puree
□ Pumpkin pie spice
□ Mustard seeds
□ One 1-pound bag dried red lentils
□ One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
□ One 15-ounce can diced tomatoes
□ Three 15-ounce cans brown lentils
□ 1 loaf sourdough bread
□ Corn tortillas (4)
□ 2 pounds firm tofu, packed in water
□ One 14-ounce package soft tofu
□ One 2.24-ounce can sliced black olives
□ One 8-ounce bag dark chocolate chips or cacao nibs
□ One 8-ounce bag dried cranberries
□ 8 ounces dried goji berries (optional)
□   Two 15-ounce cans coconut milk
□   One 15-ounce can tomato sauce
□   One 8-ounce jar Dijon mustard
□   One 10-ounce bag chopped walnuts
□   2 pounds chopped frozen spinach


Week 2—Drinks, Snacks, and Dessert
Remember, these recipes are to be enjoyed whenever the moment feels right.
Drink Recipe: Matcha Latte
Snack Recipe #1: Pumpkin Hummus with cucumbers and carrots
Snack Recipe #2: Plant-Powered Trail Mix
Dessert Recipe #1: Chocolate Mousse
Dessert Recipe #2: Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites


Week 2—Quick-Fix Menu
Quick-Fix Breakfast: Simple Overnight Oats
Quick-Fix Lunch: The Daily Salad with sourdough toast spread with Pumpkin
  Hummus
Quick-Fix Dinner: No-Tuna Sunflower Salad with leftover vegetables and
  Pumpkin Hummus
Quick-Fix Snack: 15 almonds
Quick-Fix Dessert: ⅓ cup blueberries or 15 strawberries


Week 2 Meal Prep


Week 2 Recommended Prep
Red Lentil Curry Soup
Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites
Pumpkin Hummus
Simple Overnight Oats


Week 2 Optional Prep
Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili
Slice cucumbers and carrots for a snack on Day 1, then place them in a container
   with water in the fridge until ready to enjoy with the Pumpkin Hummus on
  Day 2.
Oil-Free Orange Dressing
Chocolate Mousse

DAY 1 (USUALLY SUNDAY)

    Meal         Recipe                                                Plant Points
    Breakfast    Tofu Scramble Bowls with Citrus and Mint Salad        3–5
    Lunch        Red Lentil Curry Soup with sourdough bread            8
    Dinner       Lentil-Walnut Tacos                                   5



DAY 2

    Meal         Recipe                                                         Plant
                                                                                Points
    Breakfast    Pumpkin Pie for Breakfast Smoothie                             4–5
    Lunch        Leftover Mushroom Risotto with Down ’n’ Dirty Kale             10–12
                 Salad
    Dinner       Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili                              10–11



DAY 3

    Meal         Recipe                                                               Plant
                                                                                      Points
    Breakfast    Simple Overnight Oats                                                4
    Lunch        The Daily Salad with Oil-Free Orange Dressing and leftover           17
                 Red Lentil Curry Soup
    Dinner       Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes                                          6



DAY 4

    Meal         Recipe                                                          Plant
                                                                                 Points
    Breakfast    Superfood Smoothie with nut butter drizzle                      6
    Lunch        Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili with Down ’n’ Dirty           15–18
                 Kale Salad
    Dinner       Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl                                   9–10
DAY 5

    Meal        Recipe                                                       Plant
                                                                             Points
    Breakfast   Simple Overnight Oats                                        4
    Lunch       The Daily Salad with sourdough toast topped with Pumpkin     12–15
                Hummus
    Dinner      Saag Tofu                                                    5



DAY 6

    Meal        Recipe                               Plant Points
    Breakfast   Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge       6
    Lunch       Leftover Saag Tofu                   5
    Dinner      Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew             7–9



DAY 7

    Meal        Recipe                                                       Plant
                                                                             Points
    Breakfast   Gluten-Free Pancakes with berries                            2+
    Lunch       No-Tuna Sunflower Salad on sourdough toast with Citrus       9–10
                and Mint Salad
    Dinner      Leftover Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew with Down ’n’ Dirty Kale   12–16
                Salad
BREAKFAST


Tofu Scramble Bowls
Consider this your new favorite brunch. Tofu is lower in saturated fat, lower in
monounsaturated fat, and higher in polyunsaturated fats and free of cholesterol
compared to eggs, making it the perfect swap.
   If you’re new to cooking with tofu, know that you’ll need to press it first. You
can do this with a tofu press, or by wrapping the tofu block in paper towels,
placing it on a rimmed baking sheet and placing something heavy on top. Let sit
for about 10 minutes to let most of the water drain out. This allows the tofu to
become chewier, perfect for egg-like curds.
Serves 2
5 tablespoons vegetable broth
8 ounces firm tofu, drained, pressed, and crumbled or diced
1 scallion, green parts only, sliced
½ teaspoon smoked paprika
½ teaspoon ground turmeric
¼ teaspoon ground cumin
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 slices leftover Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast, cubed
2 cups finely chopped kale, stems removed
Heat a medium skillet over medium heat, add 2 tablespoons vegetable broth, and
heat until shimmering. Add the tofu and cook until warmed, about 2 minutes,
then add the scallions, paprika, turmeric, cumin, and a pinch of salt. Reduce the
heat to low and cook until warmed, stirring occasionally, about 5 more minutes.
   In a separate skillet, heat the remaining 3 tablespoons broth over medium heat.
Add the sweet potatoes and cook, stirring occasionally, until warm, about 5
minutes. Add the kale and a pinch of salt and pepper and cover. Cook for about 3
minutes, until the greens are just wilted.
   Divide the kale and sweet potatoes into two bowls, then top with the tofu
mixture. For a heartier meal, add a slice of sourdough toast, with or without
peanut or almond butter.
Supercharge It!
Top with chopped parsley, chopped cilantro, and diced tomatoes
3 PLANT POINTS
Pumpkin Pie for Breakfast Smoothie
Pie for breakfast? Sounds good to us! Especially when it’s in the form of a
sippable, nutrient-dense smoothie, perfect for on-the-go mornings. Serve as is or
topped with Crispy Oat Granola.
Serves 2
2 frozen bananas
1 cup canned coconut milk
1 cup unsweetened almond milk
½ cup pumpkin puree
2 tablespoons maple syrup
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
1 teaspoon pumpkin pie spice
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
1½ cups ice
Place the bananas, coconut milk, almond milk, pumpkin, maple syrup, hemp
seeds, pumpkin pie spice, cinnamon, and ice in a blender and blend until creamy
and very smooth.
   To make it into a smoothie bowl, reduce the liquid by half (use ½ cup of
canned coconut milk and ½ cup of canned almond milk), then blend as directed.
Divide the contents into two bowls and add 1 tablespoon pecans and 1 to 2
tablespoons Crispy Oat Granola.

Lower FODMAP Options:
Unripe bananas are lower in FODMAPs than ripe bananas, but you can also
reduce this to ½ banana per serving if you are sensitive to fructose. ½ ripe
banana or 1 medium unripe banana are both low FODMAPs.
Supercharge It!
Add a handful of fresh or frozen spinach to add an extra boost of vitamins,
minerals, and fiber and turn your smoothie green.
4 PLANT POINTS
Simple Overnight Oats
Everyone needs a good overnight oat recipe, and this is our go-to. The beauty of
overnight oats is that they are customizable to whatever you are craving: add soy
milk for a higher protein breakfast, almond milk for low FODMAP, or coconut
milk for a creamier bowl of oats. And get those omega-3s cranking with the
super seeds on this one!
Serves 2
⅔ cup old-fashioned oats
1 tablespoon chia seeds
1 tablespoon almond butter or peanut butter
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
1 cup dairy-free milk of choice or up to 1⅓ cups milk for a thinner oatmeal
¾ cup fruit of choice
Maple syrup, if desired
In a resealable jar or bowl, combine the oats, chia seeds, nut butter, and
cinnamon. Add a splash of the milk and mix everything together, working the
nut butter into the oats as much as possible. Add the rest of the milk and stir to
combine.
   Cover the bowl or place the lid on the jar and refrigerate, up to 4 days. When
ready to serve, mix in the fruit and a drizzle of maple syrup, if desired.

Low FODMAP Options:
Lower FODMAP fruit options include raspberries, blueberries, strawberries,
pineapple, kiwi, and papaya.
Supercharge It!
Add in hemp seeds, additional chia seeds, fruit (especially berries), and
unsweetened shredded coconut.
4 PLANT POINTS
Gluten-Free Pancakes
Three cheers for pancakes! These gluten-free pancakes are perfect for lazy
weekend mornings. Serve them plain, or as berry pancakes by mixing fresh
chopped fruit into the finished batter.
Makes 6 pancakes
1 tablespoon ground flaxseed
3 tablespoons water
1 cup gluten-free flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
1 cup unsweetened almond milk
1 teaspoon apple cider vinegar
1 tablespoon organic sunflower oil, plus more for greasing the skillet
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Whisk together the flaxseed and 3 tablespoons water and set aside until jelled,
about 5 minutes.
  In a large mixing bowl, whisk together the gluten-free flour, baking powder,
baking soda, and salt in a large mixing bowl. Set aside.
  In a separate medium bowl, add the almond milk and vinegar. Then add in the
sunflower oil, vanilla, and the jelled flax. Whisk to incorporate, then add the
almond milk mixture into the flour mixture and whisk thoroughly until no lumps
remain.
  Grease and heat a large skillet with coconut oil or cooking spray over
medium-high heat. Drop batter into the hot skillet, using a ¼ cup measuring cup.
Wait for large bubbles to form, then flip and cook another 60 seconds, until
golden brown on both sides.
  Serve with berries and maple syrup, if desired.
Supercharge It!
Add chopped berries to the batter.
2 PLANT POINTS
LUNCH


Red Lentil Curry Soup
There is nothing more soothing than sipping on an incredibly nourishing soup
loaded with vegetables, lentils, and spices. After a bowl of this, we’re ready to
conquer the world! Well, at least conquer our to-do list. For a heartier meal,
serve with Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad or toasted sourdough bread.
Serves 4, with leftovers for later in the week
1 tablespoon garlic-infused olive oil
¼ cup finely chopped onion
1 celery stalk, chopped
3 large carrots, chopped
1 large baking potato, chopped
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
½ teaspoon ground ginger
½ teaspoon curry powder
½ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
4 cups vegetable broth or Biome Broth
1¼ cups red lentils
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes, drained
½ cup chopped fresh parsley or fresh cilantro
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
Heat the olive oil in a large saucepan over medium heat. Add the onion and let
cook until soft, 5 to 7 minutes.
   Add the celery, carrots, and potato. Cook until soft and lightly browned,
another 10 minutes. Add the cumin, turmeric, paprika, ginger, curry powder,
salt, and pepper then stir until fragrant, 30 to 60 seconds.
   Add the broth, lentils, and tomatoes and bring to a simmer. Cover and cook
for 20 minutes, or until the lentils are tender. Remove from the heat, let cool
slightly, then puree half of the soup either using a blender or immersion blender.
Add the pureed soup back into the pot, then stir in the herbs and lemon juice.
Add salt and pepper to taste.

Low FODMAP Options:
Onions have moderate GOS. Replace with ¼ cup fresh or dried chives at the
same time as the celery, carrots, and chopped potato.
Red lentils have moderate GOS. Reduce the amount used to 1 cup so that only ¼
cup cooked is in each serving.
8 PLANT POINTS
Citrus and Mint Salad
This refreshing salad is one of our favorite lettuce-free options. Great as a side
dish, dessert, or simple snack. We’ve called for orange and grapefruit here, but it
can be subbed with any citrus. As someone who grew up in Syracuse, New
York, I’m required to say “Let’s Go Orange!”
Serves 2
2 large oranges, peeled, pith removed, and segmented
1 large grapefruit, peeled, pith removed, and segmented* yellow light, fructan
   for ½ cup serving
Zest and juice of 1 lime
1 teaspoon 100% maple syrup
1 tablespoon minced fresh mint
Toss together the segmented oranges and grapefruit with the lime zest, juice, and
maple syrup. Divide between two plates and sprinkle with the fresh mint.

Low FODMAP Option:
Grapefruits have moderate fructans. Reduce the amount of grapefruit in this
recipe to ½ grapefruit (¼ grapefruit per serving), which is low FODMAP.
3 PLANT POINTS
Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili
This butternut squash and quinoa chili is a thick, soul-warming dish packed with
vegetables.
Makes 2 servings
1¼ cups Biome Broth
⅔ cup peeled and diced butternut squash
¼ cup sliced scallions, green parts only
¼ medium green bell pepper, diced
¼ medium red bell pepper, diced
½ jalapeño, seeds and ribs removed, finely diced
1 cup (8 ounces) canned diced tomatoes
1 large carrot, diced
½ medium zucchini, diced
1½ teaspoons smoked paprika
1 teaspoon ground cumin
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 cup cooked quinoa
Heat 1 tablespoon of broth in a large saucepan over medium heat. Add the
butternut squash and cook, stirring often and adding more broth as needed to
prevent the squash from sticking, until just softened, stirring often, 5 to 8
minutes.
   Add the scallions, bell peppers, and jalapeño and cook, stirring occasionally,
for an additional 5 minutes. Add another tablespoon of the broth to prevent
sticking, if necessary.
   Add the diced tomatoes, carrot, zucchini, paprika, cumin, and remaining
broth.
   Bring the mixture to a boil, then cover and reduce the heat to low and simmer
for 15 minutes, until the vegetables are soft.
   Taste and adjust the seasonings as needed, adding salt and pepper to taste.
Add the cooked quinoa and allow to cook for about 5 more minutes. Serve.

Low FODMAP Option:
Some canned tomatoes contain garlic and onion. Check the ingredient list.
Make-Ahead Tips:
This dish requires cooked quinoa, so cooking the quinoa ahead of time will make
for easier meal prep.
Supercharge It!
Top with fresh herbs, like parsley.
10 PLANT POINTS
No-Tuna Sunflower Salad
Sunflower seeds take the place of tuna in this twist on a classic. The lemon,
parsley, and chives give this salad a bright flavor, and pulsing all the ingredients
in the food processor creates a similar texture to that other tuna salad.
Makes 4 servings, with enough for leftovers later in the week
1 cup sunflower seeds
Juice of 2 large lemons
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
½ cup roughly chopped fresh parsley, stems removed
½ cup roughly chopped fresh chives
¼ teaspoon smoked paprika
2 celery stalks, chopped
4 scallions, green parts only, chopped
½ teaspoon salt
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
8 slices of sourdough bread, for serving
Salad greens, for serving
Sliced tomato, for serving
Place the sunflower seeds in a sealable container and cover with water. Soak at
room temperature for at least 24 hours. They should double in size. When ready
to use, drain the water off the seeds, add fresh water to cover, then drain again.
   Place ½ cup of sunflower seeds into the base of a food processor along with
the lemon juice and mustard. Pulse 10 times, until finely chopped.
   Add the remaining ½ cup sunflower seeds, the parsley, chives, paprika, celery,
scallions, salt, and black pepper. Pulse in a food processor until the texture is
similar to traditional tuna salad, about 10 more times.
   Serve on toasted sourdough bread, with salad greens and sliced tomato.

Make-Ahead Options:
Prep the sunflower seeds at least one day ahead of making this salad.
Supercharge It!
Toss 1 teaspoon of chia seeds into this salad for extra crunch, healthy fats, and
plant points!
6 PLANT POINTS
DINNER


Lentil-Walnut Tacos
You’ll use this lentil walnut taco filling in both the Lentil Walnut Tacos and the
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes. We love recipes that do double duty and save you
time in the kitchen.
Makes 4 servings, with enough for leftovers for Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes
½ cup walnuts, finely chopped
1 tablespoon olive oil or Biome Broth
1 large tomato, chopped
Two 14.5-ounce cans brown lentils, drained and rinsed
2 teaspoons dried oregano
2 teaspoons ground cumin
2 tablespoons chili powder
½ teaspoon salt
¼ cup water
Tacos
4 to 6 corn tortillas
½ recipe Lentil Walnut Filling
Creamy Cilantro Sauce, for serving
Diced tomatoes, chopped fresh cilantro, shredded lettuce, and/or sliced black
   olives, for serving
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes
2 medium sweet potatoes
½ recipe Lentil Walnut Filling
Creamy Cilantro Sauce
Diced tomatoes, chopped fresh cilantro, shredded lettuce, and/or sliced black
  olives, for serving
Heat a large skillet over medium heat and add the walnuts. Toast, stirring often,
for about 2 minutes, until the walnuts are lightly browned and fragrant, taking
care not to burn. Remove the walnuts from the skillet and set aside.
   Add the oil and tomato to the same skillet and cook until the tomato is soft, 3
to 4 more minutes. Add the canned lentils, oregano, cumin, chili powder, salt,
and water. Cook until heated through, gently mashing some of the lentils with
the back of a wooden spoon or spatula, for 5 minutes.
   Taste, adding more chili powder or salt, if desired.
   To make the tacos: Warm the corn tortillas and top with the filling and the
toppings of your choice.
   To make the stuffed sweet potatoes: Preheat the oven to 400°F. Using a fork,
poke the sweet potatoes a few times on each side to help release steam as they
cook. Place directly into the oven and cook until tender, 45 to 55 minutes for
smaller sweet potatoes, 55 to 70 minutes for larger ones.
   Remove the potatoes from the oven and split them down the middle. Top with
the Lentil-Walnut Filling, Creamy Cilantro Sauce, and desired toppings.
TACOS—5 PLANT POINTS
STUFFED SWEET POTATOES—6 PLANT POINTS

Lower FODMAP Option:
½ cup serving of canned, cooked lentils is considered low FODMAP. A larger
serving has moderate GOS. If you are sensitive to this food, pay close attention
to portion size.
Chili powder can contain garlic and onion. Garlic is high in FODMAPs (fructan)
and onion is high in fructan and has moderate amounts of GOS. If you find that
you are sensitive to either of these, substitute smoked paprika here.
Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl
“Soba” is the Japanese word for “buckwheat,” which is the wheat-free flour that
makes up soba noodles. Oishi is the Japanese word for “delicious,” which is
what you’ll be saying while you enjoy the soba.
Makes 2 bowls
½ cup frozen, shelled edamame
4 ounces uncooked soba noodles
10 to 20 snow peas, vertically sliced
2 teaspoons sesame oil
¼ cup Biome Broth or vegetable broth
1 teaspoon miso paste
¼ teaspoon 100% maple syrup
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil
1 cup thinly sliced red cabbage
4 rehydrated dried shiitake mushrooms, stems removed and sliced
1 to 2 carrots, shaved into ribbons with vegetable peeler (1 large or 2 small)
4 scallions (green parts only), sliced
Bring a medium saucepan of water to boil over medium-high heat. Add the
edamame and soba noodles and cook for 2 minutes.
   Add in the sliced snow peas and cook for an additional minute, until the
noodles are tender. Drain and rinse with cold water to stop cooking. Set aside.
   In a small bowl, whisk together the sesame oil, broth, miso paste, maple
syrup, ginger, and salt. Set aside.
   Heat the olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat, then add in the
cabbage, mushrooms, carrots, and scallions. Toss and cook for about 3 minutes,
until just tender.
   Add the edamame, noodles, snow peas, and sesame sauce to the skillet and
toss until the dish is heated through, 2 to 3 minutes.

Lower FODMAP Options:
5 snowpea pods per serving is considered low FODMAP, while 7 snowpea pods
is considered moderate FODMAP (fructan and mannitol).
2 shiitake mushrooms per serving is considered low FODMAP. Feel free to
increase the serving here if you are not sensitive to mannitol.
Supercharge It!
Add a serving of cooked tofu for a higher protein dish.
Make-Ahead Tip:
Prep the sauce and chop the vegetables ahead of time, then store in the fridge
until ready to use.
9 PLANT POINTS
Saag Tofu
We hope you love Indian food as much as we do, because we cannot get enough!
While we’re partial to almost any vegetable in a fragrant curry sauce, saag tofu
is one of our favorites. The ingredient list seems long, but rest assured that it’s
mostly spices. If these spices are new to you, consider purchasing them from the
bulk section of your grocery store so you’re able to get only a tablespoon or two
of what you need.
Serves 4, with enough for leftovers for later in the week
2 teaspoons garlic-infused olive oil
2 tablespoons freshly grated ginger
1 Thai chile, seeded and chopped
1½ tablespoons garam masala
1 tablespoon ground coriander
1 tablespoon ground turmeric
1 tablespoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon mustard seeds
1 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
2 pounds frozen chopped spinach (5 cups), thawed and drained
1 cup canned full-fat coconut milk
1 cup tomato sauce
One 14-ounce package firm or extra-firm tofu, drained and pressed
2 teaspoons cornstarch
Freshly ground black pepper
2 cups cooked rice, to serve
Heat 1 teaspoon olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. Stir in the
ginger, chili, garam masala, coriander, turmeric, cumin, cayenne, mustard seeds,
and salt. Cook for another 30 to 60 seconds, until just fragrant.
   Add the spinach leaves to the skillet and cook to wilt, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove
from the heat and let cool slightly.
   Add the spinach to the base of a food processor and pulse to finely chop the
mixture. Add back to the skillet along with the coconut milk and tomato sauce,
then let simmer, stirring occasionally, for 30 minutes.
   While the spinach is simmering, make the tofu. Dice the tofu and toss with the
cornstarch in a medium bowl until well-coated. Heat the remaining teaspoon of
olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat, then add in the tofu. Cook, stirring
often, until the tofu is golden brown and crispy. Add the cooked tofu to the
spinach mixture and stir to combine.
   Season to taste, adding in more salt and pepper as needed and serve warm
with cooked rice.

Low FODMAP Options:
More than 2¾ cups spinach has moderate fructans.
5 PLANT POINTS
Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew
Garlic-infused olive oil and fresh ginger really make the curry stand out! Make a
batch of this soup on the weekend and reheat for lunches or dinner during a busy
week.
Serves 2
1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil
1 teaspoon minced fresh ginger
1 carrot, chopped
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 tablespoon dried or fresh chives (finely chopped if fresh)
1 sweet potato, peeled and chopped
2 teaspoons curry powder, plus more to taste
2½ cups Biome Broth or vegetable broth
½ cup canned lentils
1 large handful fresh spinach or kale leaves
Heat a medium pot over medium heat. Add the olive oil, ginger, and chopped
carrots. Sprinkle with a pinch of salt and pepper, then cook for 3 minutes,
stirring occasionally.
   Add the chives and sweet potato and cook for an additional 5 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Stir in the curry powder.
   Add the broth to the pot, cover, and raise the heat to medium-high to bring to
a low boil. Add the lentils to the soup and stir to combine. Reduce the heat to
low and simmer, uncovered, for about 20 minutes, until the potatoes are fork
tender.
   Add salt, pepper, or curry powder to taste. Just before serving, stir in the
greens until just wilted. Serve with a side of sourdough bread, if preferred.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Chop the sweet potato and carrot ahead of time.
Supercharge It!
Top with fresh scallions and parsley.
7 PLANT POINTS
SNACKS, DRINKS, AND DESSERTS


Matcha Latte
This antioxidant-rich beverage is the perfect pick-me-up. We recommend
almond milk for Week 1, with the option of choosing soy milk after Week 2 for
higher protein. After Week 3, you can also use coconut milk for a creamier latte.
Whatever dairy-free milk you prefer, we recommend one without carrageenan.
Serves 2
1½ cups unsweetened almond milk
2 teaspoons matcha powder (organic ceremonial matcha powder will have better
   flavor than culinary matcha)
½ cup boiling water
100% maple syrup, as desired, to taste
Bring the almond milk to a low simmer in a small pot over medium-high heat.
   Place 1 teaspoon matcha powder at the bottom of two mugs. Slowly whisk ¼
cup boiling water into each mug, completely dissolving the matcha powder.
Keep whisking, then add the warm milk, tipping the cup slightly to help create
more foam. Sweeten with maple syrup, if desired.
   For an iced latte, whisk the matcha powder with enough water to form a paste,
stirring so there are no clumps. Add cold unsweetened almond milk and stir
vigorously until well mixed. Divide between two glasses, stir in the maple syrup,
as desired, and serve over ice.
2 PLANT POINTS
Pumpkin Hummus
Pumpkin is a fantastic source of fiber, vitamin A, and antioxidants. This savory
pumpkin dip tastes wonderful with fresh vegetables, whole-grain sourdough
toast, or any other way you can think to use it!
Makes 2 cups
One 15-ounce can chickpeas, drained and rinsed
⅔ cup pumpkin puree
½ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon ground cumin
Juice of ½ large lemon
1 tablespoon garlic-infused olive oil
Place the chickpeas, pumpkin, salt, cumin, lemon juice, and olive oil in the base
of a food processor. Blend until smooth and creamy, scraping down the sides as
needed.
   Transfer to an airtight container and store in the fridge for up to 1 week.

Lower FODMAP Options:
Enjoy a smaller, 2-tablespoon serving of the hummus for a lower FODMAP
option.
Supercharge It!
Sprinkle the hummus with pumpkin seeds or hemp seeds for extra protein,
healthy fats, crunch, and Plant Points.
3 PLANT POINTS
Plant-Powered Trail Mix
This snack mix will keep you powered throughout the day with fiber and plant-
based protein.
Makes 2 servings
2 tablespoons pepitas
2 tablespoons almonds
2 tablespoons walnuts
2 tablespoons dark chocolate chips or cacao nibs
2 tablespoons dried cranberries
Combine the pepitas, almonds, walnuts, chocolate chips, and cranberries in an
airtight container or bag and store until ready to eat.
Supercharge It!
Add 1 tablespoon goji berries.
4 PLANT POINTS
Chocolate Mousse
Creamy, sweet, and perfectly satisfying, this chocolate mousse is a plant
protein–packed sweet treat.


   Note: Place the can of coconut milk in the refrigerator upside down for at least
3 hours. This will allow the coconut milk fat/solids to harden and separate from
the liquid. This helps make the mousse creamier!
Serves 4 to 6
1 block soft tofu, drained but not pressed
½ cup canned coconut milk
½ cup 100% maple syrup
½ cup unsweetened cocoa powder
2 tablespoons peanut butter
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 teaspoon salt
Place the tofu, coconut milk, maple syrup, cocoa powder, peanut butter, vanilla,
and salt into the base of a food processor or high-powered blender. Puree until
very smooth, scraping down the sides as necessary.
   Divide among 4 to 6 ramekins or small bowls and allow to chill in the
refrigerator for 30 minutes or more to set.
Supercharge It!
Add up to 30 raspberries per serving for added sweet flavor, fiber, and another
Plant Point.

Low FODMAP Options:
Silken tofu is high FODMAP, but firm tofu is not high FODMAP in a ⅔-cup
serving size.
3 PLANT POINTS
Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites
Cookie dough, but it’s healthy? Yep. We play to win the game. If you don’t have
oat flour, place ½ cup rolled oats in a blender or food processor and process until
a fine flour forms.
Makes about 16 balls
One 15-ounce can chickpeas, drained, rinsed, and pat dry
⅓ cup oat flour
¼ cup peanut butter
3 tablespoons 100% maple syrup, plus more as desired
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
⅓ cup dairy-free chocolate chips (Enjoy Life Foods has many low FODMAP–
   certified products, including chocolate chips!)
Place the chickpeas, oat flour, peanut butter, maple syrup, vanilla, salt, and
cinnamon in the base of a food processor.
   Process until a dough forms. Taste, adding in more maple syrup as desired.
   Fold in the chocolate chips, then pulse until just combined and the chips are
incorporated.
   Roll into balls and place on a parchment paper–lined rimmed baking sheet.
Store in the fridge to harden for at least 15 minutes. Transfer to an airtight
container and keep in the fridge for up to 1 week.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Make ahead of time for quick snacks throughout the week.
2 PLANT POINTS
Week 3
More than halfway done! You’re making great progress. So now that we’re two
weeks in, we’re going to start ramping things up a little bit. This week you’ll be
seeing some garlic, onions, and grains. I love these flavors and know they will
excite your taste buds. Don’t forget to drink the Lemon Ginger Tea if the mood
hits you. You’ll also see some familiar recipes from Week 1 that will make a
guest appearance here in Week 3. Make sure to use the low FODMAP recipe
options when you think it’s necessary. And as always, post your experience to
#fiberfueled4weeks so I can follow your progress and so we can all be in it
together as a community.

WEEK 3 SHOPPING LIST
Produce
□ 1 medium piece fresh ginger
□ 5 large lemons
□ 3 large red bell peppers
□ 1 yellow bell pepper
□ 2 large green bell peppers
□ 1 ounce dried shiitake mushrooms
□ 2 medium yellow or white onions
□ 1 pound carrots
□ 1 pound celery hearts
□ 4 large cucumbers
□ 1 pint cherry tomatoes
□ 1 5-ounce bag spinach leaves
□ 6 bananas
□ 4 kiwis
□ 1 5-ounce package leafy salad greens
□ 1 100-gram container broccoli sprouts
□ 1 bunch fresh parsley
□ 3 large avocados
□ 1 bunch fresh chives
□ 1 Roma tomato
□ 1 bunch kale (lacinato or curly)
□ 1 jalapeño
□   3 bunches fresh cilantro
□   6 limes
□   1 large spaghetti squash
□   1 shallot
□   1 head garlic
□   16 ounces peanuts
□   2 honeydew melons
□   1 bunch fresh mint
□   2 pints berries of choice
□   1 large sweet potato
□   3 bunches scallions
□   1 head romaine lettuce
□   2 bunches baby bok choy
□   4 ounces shiitake mushrooms
□   2 teaspoons tomato paste
□   1 pound dried brown lentils
□   ¼ cup raw cashews
□   1 large tomato
□   1 small head red or green Napa cabbage
□   4 collard leaves
□   1 medium onion
□   1 bunch asparagus


Cupboard
□ One 64-ounce container almond milk
□ One 8-ounce bag frozen edamame in pods
□ One 16-ounce bag rolled oats
□ One 2-ounce bag sliced almonds
□ One 8-ounce bag frozen cherries
□ 2 ounces mushroom powder
□ 8 ounces soba noodles
□ Three 15-ounce cans chickpeas
□ One 4-ounce jar kalamata olives
□ One 8-ounce jar Dijon mustard
□ One 12-ounce bag frozen okra
□ One 14-ounce can kidney beans
□ One 16-ounce jar kimchi
□ One 8-ounce bag farro
□   One 15-ounce can pumpkin puree
□   One 15-ounce can black beans
□   One 16-package red lentils
□   One 15-ounce can fire-roasted diced tomatoes
□   1 loaf sourdough bread
□   Corn tortillas (4)
□   4 pounds extra-firm tofu, packed in water
□   Capers
□   One 2.24-ounce can sliced black olives
□   One 15-ounce can tomato sauce
□   One 32-ounce container vegetable broth
□   Vegan Worcestershire sauce
□   1 small jar hot sauce, like Texas Pete


Week 3—Drinks, Snacks, and Dessert
Remember, these recipes are to be enjoyed whenever the moment feels right.
Drink Recipe: The Green Drink
Snack Recipe #1: Speedy Edamame
Snack Recipe #2: Turmeric Energy Bites
Dessert Recipe #1: Chocolate Banana Nice Cream
Dessert Recipe #2: Mushroom Hot Cocoa


Week 3—Quick-Fix Menu
Quick-Fix Breakfast: Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie
Quick-Fix Lunch: Mediterranean Grain Salad
Quick-Fix Dinner: Wild Biome Super Soup
Quick-Fix Snack: 20 almonds
Quick-Fix Dessert: 1 cup blueberries or 20 strawberries


Week 3 Meal Prep


Week 3 Recommended Prep
Biome Broth
Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl
Make both the Crispy Baked Tofu and the Sesame Dressing from the Sesame
  Noodle Meal Prep Bowl
Simple Overnight Oats
Mediterranean Grain Salad
Turmeric Energy Bites


Week 3 Optional Prep
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast ahead of time, then toast right before serving for
   breakfast on Day 6.
Make the Gumbo on Day 1, then place half in the fridge for dinner on Day 4 and
   the remaining half in the freezer for dinner on Day 4 in Week 4.
Prep the vegetables on Day 1 for the Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu on
   Day 2.

DAY 1 (USUALLY SUNDAY)

     Meal         Recipe                                                              Plant
                                                                                      Points
     Breakfast    Puttanesca Tofu Scramble with Matcha Latte                          9
     Lunch        Colorful Collard Wraps                                              9
     Dinner       Lentil Bolognese with Spaghetti Squash and Down ’n’ Dirty           12–17
                  Kale Salad and Pepita Parmesan



DAY 2

     Meal         Recipe                                               Plant Points
     Breakfast    Superfood Smoothie Bowl                              6
     Lunch        Leftover No-Tuna Sunflower Salad on sourdough        7
     Dinner       Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu                  10



DAY 3

     Meal         Recipe                              Plant Points
     Breakfast    Simple Overnight Oats               4
     Lunch        Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl        10
     Dinner       Buffalo Chickpea Salad              7



DAY 4
    Meal        Recipe                                         Plant Points
    Breakfast   Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie         4
    Lunch       Mediterranean Grain Salad                      8
    Dinner      Gumbo                                          7



DAY 5

    Meal        Recipe                                Plant Points
    Breakfast   Simple Overnight Oats                 4
    Lunch       Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl          10
    Dinner      Buffalo Chickpea Salad                7



DAY 6

    Meal        Recipe                                Plant Points
    Breakfast   Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast         3
    Lunch       Mediterranean Grain Salad             8
    Dinner      Kimchi Fried Rice                     7



DAY 7

    Meal        Recipe                          Plant Points
    Breakfast   Spicy Breakfast Tacos           6
    Lunch       Nourishing Buddha Bowl          6
    Dinner      Lentil Masala                   6
BREAKFAST


Puttanesca Tofu Scramble
We took our favorite pasta sauce and turned it into a breakfast scramble.
Because why would you not!
Serves 2
1 tablespoon vegetable broth or Biome Broth
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 scallion (green parts only), thinly sliced
1 Roma tomato, chopped
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes, plus more to taste (optional)
½ teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon dried oregano
8 ounces extra-firm tofu, drained and pressed
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
Salt
1 tablespoon capers, drained
¼ cup sliced black olives
Freshly ground black pepper
Fresh parsley, chopped, for serving
In a large skillet over medium heat, combine the vegetable broth and olive oil.
Add the scallion, tomato, red pepper flakes (if using), thyme, and oregano. Sauté
for about 5 minutes, until the vegetables are softened.
   Use a spatula to move the veggies to one side of the pan, then crumble in the
tofu, gently breaking the tofu up into small curds so that it resembles eggs. Add
the turmeric and a pinch of salt, then cook for 2 to 3 minutes, stirring often, until
the tofu is warmed through.
   Add the capers and black olives and toss together. Add salt, black pepper, and
red pepper flakes to taste. Top with fresh parsley. Serve as is or with toasted
sourdough.
7 PLANT POINTS
Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie
This super smoothie is so thick and creamy, you might mistake it for a milk
shake! Packed with plant-based protein and satisfying healthy fats, this super
smoothie will keep you full for hours.
Makes 2 smoothies
2 frozen bananas
¼ cup cocoa powder
¼ cup peanut butter
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
3 cups almond or soy milk
2 teaspoons 100% maple syrup or 1 date
Handful of ice cubes
Combine the bananas, cocoa powder, peanut butter, hemp seeds, almond milk,
maple syrup, and a handful of ice cubes in a blender and puree until creamy and
smooth. Divide into two glasses and serve.
  To make it into a smoothie bowl, reduce the milk to ¾ cup and top it with
your favorite toppers. We love a few extra slices of banana, our Crispy Oat
Granola, and a drizzle of peanut butter.

Lower FODMAP Options:
Unripe bananas are lower in FODMAPs than ripe bananas. Half a ripe banana or
1 medium unripe banana are both low FODMAP. Use ½ banana per serving if
you are sensitive to fructose.
Dates are higher in fructans, so use maple syrup if necessary.
Supercharge It!
Add 1 teaspoon of chia seeds for an extra dose of healthy fats.
4 PLANT POINTS
Spicy Breakfast Tacos
Tacos for breakfast? Yes, please! Feel free to adjust the spice by decreasing the
amount of jalapeño used in the salsa.
Makes 4 tacos
Cherry Tomato Salsa
¼ cup sliced cherry tomatoes
½ jalapeño, seeded and sliced
2 teaspoons garlic-infused olive oil
1 garlic clove, minced
Juice of ½ lime (save the other half for serving)
Pinch salt
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
Spicy Tofu Taco Filling
½ cup black beans
¾ teaspoon smoked paprika
¾ teaspoon ground cumin
2 teaspoons fresh chopped chives
Dash cayenne pepper (optional)
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 teaspoon olive oil
6 ounces firm tofu, drained, rinsed, and pressed
4 corn tortillas
¼ cup fresh cilantro
¼ avocado, sliced
Make the salsa: In a small bowl, combine the sliced cherry tomatoes, jalapeño,
olive oil, garlic, and lime juice with a pinch of salt and pepper. Set aside.
   Make the taco filling: In a small saucepan, heat the black beans along with 2
tablespoons of water, ¼ teaspoon smoked paprika, ½ teaspoon cumin, 1
teaspoon chives, and a small pinch of cayenne, if using. Continue to cook for
about 5 minutes, until warm. Gently smash the mixture using the back of a
spoon, leaving some black beans whole. Set aside.
   In a small bowl, add the remaining ½ teaspoon paprika, ½ teaspoon cumin, 1
teaspoon chives, dash cayenne, if using, and salt and pepper. Add 2 tablespoons
water and whisk together. Set aside.
   Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. Once hot, crumble the
drained tofu into the pan along with the reserved taco sauce. Cook, stirring
occasionally, for 5 minutes, or until heated through and the seasoning is
absorbed.
   To serve, warm the tortillas in a clean and dry skillet until warm and flexible.
Top with the tofu, black beans, cilantro, avocado, cherry tomato salsa, and a
squeeze of fresh lime juice. Serve warm.

Low FODMAP Options:
Garlic is high in fructans. Sub garlic-infused olive oil for the regular olive oil if
you’re sensitive.
Black beans have moderate GOS. Sub ¼ cup chickpeas.
6 PLANT POINTS
LUNCH


Colorful Collard Wraps
Collard greens are rich in vitamin A, vitamin K, and calcium. Incredibly
nutrient-dense and wildly underrated, they’re not just for Southern cooking!
Filling these greens with flavorful goodies makes a perfect midday meal.
Makes 4 collard wraps
6 ounces firm or extra-firm tofu, drained and pressed
1 tablespoon tamari
1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil
4 collard leaves
½ cup Pumpkin Hummus
½ cup red or yellow bell pepper strips
½ cup thinly sliced red cabbage
1 carrot, sliced into short, thin strips
½ cup sliced cucumber (short, thin strips)
½ avocado
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a large rimmed baking sheet with parchment
paper (or lightly spray with cooking oil) and set aside.
   Slice the tofu into rectangles or strips, then toss with the tamari and olive oil.
Place the tofu on the prepared baking sheet and bake for 30 minutes, flipping
halfway through. Remove from the oven and set aside.
   Wash and dry the collard leaves, then use a small paring knife to shave the
stem to be flush to the leaf so it’s easier to roll.
   Place the collard leaves on a flat surface and spread 2 tablespoons of the
hummus on each leaf near the top/middle of the leaf.
   Divide the pepper, cabbage, carrot, cucumber, and avocado among the 4
leaves, then sprinkle with the hemp seeds.
   Wrap like a burrito, then slice in half and serve.
Supercharge It!
Add broccoli sprouts.
9 PLANT POINTS
Mediterranean Grain Salad
This grain salad is perfect for lunch or easy dinners. Mix all of the ingredients
together, then toss with the dressing right before serving. To pack for work,
assemble the salad without the dressing in one container and the dressing in
another. Toss together, then enjoy.
Makes 6 cups
Mediterranean Grain Salad
1 cup uncooked farro
1 cup chickpeas
1 large tomato, diced
1 medium red bell pepper, chopped
1 medium yellow bell pepper, chopped
½ cup seeded and chopped cucumber
¼ cup sliced kalamata olives
¼ cup chopped fresh parsley
Zesty Lemon Dressing
1 teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest
¼ cup freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 medium garlic clove, minced
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
3 tablespoons olive oil
Make the grain salad: Bring 3 cups water to a boil in a medium saucepan over
medium-high heat and add the farro. Cover, reduce the heat to medium-low, and
simmer for 25 to 30 minutes, until the farro is tender. Drain and rinse under cold
water and set aside.
  Combine the cooked farro, chickpeas, tomato, red and yellow bell peppers,
cucumber, olives, and parsley in a large bowl and toss together. Set aside.
  Make the dressing: In a separate small bowl, whisk together the lemon zest,
lemon juice, garlic, Dijon, and a generous pinch of salt and pepper until well
combined, then slowly drizzle in the olive oil.
  Assemble: Toss the dressing with the grain salad until well combined, adding
more salt and pepper as desired. Store in the fridge. Leftovers will keep for 2 to
3 days in the fridge.

Low FODMAP Options:
Farro is high in fructans. Millet, quinoa, and brown rice are lower FODMAP
options.
Chickpeas have moderate GOS. Reduce to ½ cup.
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and use 1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil
instead.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Cook the farro ahead of time; it will keep for up to 5 or 6 days in the fridge.
Combine the farro with other vegetables and place in an airtight container in the
fridge. Make the dressing and place in a resealable airtight jar in the fridge.
Toss together before serving.
8 PLANT POINTS
Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl
These cold, Asian-inspired noodles are part of the Sunday meal-prep routine to
be used for lunch later in the week. But if you start drooling when you prep
them, we won’t hold it against you if you give them a little taste.
Makes 4 bowls
Sesame Dressing
¼ cup tahini paste
2 tablespoons warm water
1 tablespoon tamari
2 teaspoons toasted sesame oil
Juice of 1 lime
½ teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon 100% maple syrup
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes (optional)
Sesame Noodle Bowls
8 ounces soba noodles
2 cups frozen shelled edamame, thawed
2 medium carrots, sliced very thin
2 cups diced cucumber
1 recipe Crispy Baked Tofu
2 tablespoons sesame seeds, for serving
2 tablespoons hemp seeds, for serving
Make the dressing: Whisk together the tahini, water, tamari, sesame oil, lime
juice, garlic, maple syrup, and red pepper flakes until smooth. Set aside.
   Cook the soba noodles according to package instructions, then drain and rinse
under cold water to stop the cooking process. Return to the pan they were
cooked in and toss with half of the prepared sesame sauce.
   Divide the noodles among four resealable containers, then top with the
edamame, carrots, cucumber, and tofu. Drizzle with the remaining sauce, the
sesame seeds, and hemp seeds. Serve cold.

Lower FODMAP Options:
You can sub the tahini with peanut butter or almond butter.
Garlic is high in fructans. Replace with 1 teaspoon chives.
Supercharge It!
Bell pepper, broccoli, and sliced scallions would all taste great in this dish.
Make-Ahead Tips:
We love these glass containers for meal prep storage.
10 PLANT POINTS

 Crispy Baked Tofu
This crispy baked tofu can be used anywhere throughout the meal plan: for extra
protein, to top on salads, or to snack on its own. We’ll use this recipe in our
Sesame Noodle Prep Bowls in Week 3, and it can be substituted in for the peanut
tofu in the Thai Bowls in Week 3 and added to the Nourishing Buddha Bowl in
Week 4.
Serves 4
14 ounces firm or super-firm tofu
Olive oil cooking spray
Remove the tofu from the package and wrap it in a clean towel or paper towel.
Place it on a plate, then put another plate on top of it. Place a few heavy items
like cans or cookbooks on top of the tofu. Allow to sit for 30 minutes, or until
most of the water has drained onto the towel.
Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Once the tofu is drained, place it on a cutting board and cut into desired shape.
For Week 3 of the Fiber Fueled plan, rectangles and squares work well. Lightly
spray a baking sheet with olive oil and place the tofu on it in a single layer, then
spritz with more olive oil to ensure that tofu is well-coated.
   Bake for 15 minutes. Remove from the oven and flip. Return to the oven and
bake for 15 more minutes, or until the tofu is golden brown. Use in recipes
throughout the week as needed. Store in a sealed container in the fridge.
1 PLANT POINT
Nourishing Buddha Bowl
This lunch bowl is our favorite “let’s see what we can put together for a meal”
recipe. It’s a recipe but not really a recipe. It is inspired by a salad that I created
at my fave restaurant in Charleston, Verde. But you can totally adapt it! The only
must is the tahini dressing, which is so good, you’ll want to put it on everything
anyway.
   We’ve included a loose list of things to add, but it’s also customizable to
whatever leftovers you have from the week. Think of this one as a clean-out-the-
fridge type of meal.
Serves 1
Tahini Dressing
¼ cup tahini
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 garlic clove, minced
1 tablespoon olive oil
½ teaspoon salt
Bowl
½ cup chickpeas (or other cooked beans/lentil of choice)
2 to 3 cups salad greens
½ cup cooked grains
½ cup leftover Roasted Vegetables (recipe follows) or other chopped vegetables
Make the dressing: Whisk together the tahini, ⅓ cup water, the lemon juice,
garlic, and olive oil. Season to taste with salt, as desired. Set aside.
  Assemble: Place the chickpeas, salad greens, cooked grains, and other
vegetables in a large bowl and drizzle with ¼ cup tahini dressing per bowl.

Low FODMAP Options:
Tahini is high in fructans. Reduce to 1 tablespoon, then increase the olive oil by
2 tablespoons and reduce the water by half.
Garlic is high FODMAP. Omit and use garlic-infused olive oil in place of the
regular olive oil.
Chickpeas have moderate GOS. Limit to ¼ cup or use ½ cup canned lentils.
Millet, quinoa, brown rice, and white rice are low FODMAP grains.
Supercharge It!
When cooking your grains, add ½ teaspoon ground turmeric to your cooking
water. Cook as directed.
6 PLANT POINTS
 Roasted Vegetables
As mentioned, this bowl is a great way to use up leftover cooked grains and
vegetables. If you don’t have any, this is an easy go-to recipe.
Serves 2
1 cup chopped asparagus, woody ends removed
1 green bell pepper, chopped
1 cup broccoli florets, chopped
2 teaspoons olive oil
Pinch salt
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Toss the asparagus, bell pepper, and broccoli with the olive oil, salt, and
pepper until well coated. Place in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Cook
for 20 to 25 minutes, until tender.

Low FODMAP Options:
Asparagus is high FODMAP. Omit the asparagus and use zucchini or another
low FODMAP vegetable.
DINNER


Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu
First off, the spicy peanut sauce makes my heart race a little. So. Good. We’ve
added in higher FODMAP foods, like garlic, into this dish. If you notice
symptoms coming back, make sure to check out the lower FODMAP options
below.
Serves 2
½ cup uncooked brown rice
6 ounces firm or extra-firm tofu, drained, pressed, and cubed
Spicy Peanut Sauce
⅓ cup creamy peanut butter
1 tablespoon tamari
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup
3 tablespoons freshly squeezed lime juice
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes, or more or less for spice preference
1 garlic clove, minced
2 tablespoons peanuts, finely chopped, plus more for garnish
3 tablespoons hot water
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 carrot, shaved into long, noodle-like strips with a vegetable peeler
1 cup sliced (half-moon shapes) cucumber
1 cup sliced Napa or red cabbage
½ red bell pepper, sliced
2 scallions (green parts only), chopped
Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Bring 1 cup of water to a boil in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat.
Add the rice, cover, and reduce the heat to low. Simmer until the rice is tender,
about 30 minutes then lightly fluff with a fork and set aside.
   Place the tofu in a single layer on a rimmed nonstick baking sheet and cook
for 25 minutes, or until lightly browned. If you aren’t using a nonstick baking
sheet, lightly spray with cooking spray. Remove the tofu from the oven, place in
a shallow bowl, and set aside.
   Make the sauce: Whisk together the peanut butter, tamari, maple syrup, lime
juice, red pepper flakes, garlic, and peanuts until creamy and thick. Keep
whisking, slowly whisking in hot water until the sauce is pourable. Season to
taste with salt and pepper, then add 3 tablespoons of the sauce to the cooked tofu
and toss to coat. Set aside.
   Divide the cooked rice into two bowls and top with the tofu, carrots,
cucumbers, cabbage, bell peppers, and scallions. Drizzle with the remaining
Spicy Peanut Sauce and serve.
Make-Ahead Tips:
The tofu can be baked ahead of time and stored in an airtight container in the
fridge. It won’t be crispy after being stored in the fridge, so you can fry it in a
lightly oiled skillet before serving, if desired.
The Spicy Peanut Sauce can be made ahead of time; store in an airtight
container in the fridge for up to 4 days.

Low FODMAP Options:
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and replace with 1 teaspoon sliced scallion
greens.
Red, Savoy, and common cabbage are moderate FODMAP when you use more
than ¾ cup per serving.
The white bulb of the scallion is high in fructans, so only use the green parts for
low FODMAP.
Supercharge It!
Top with cilantro and/or hemp seeds.
10 PLANT POINTS
Lentil Bolognese with Spaghetti Squash
If you can’t find spaghetti squash, no worries! Just substitute cooked pasta of
choice. Boom. Ya good.
Serves 2
1 large spaghetti squash, halved and seeds scooped out
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon olive oil
¾ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
1 medium shallot, minced
4 garlic cloves, minced
2 medium carrots, chopped
2 celery stalks, chopped
4 cups tomato sauce
¾ cup dry red lentils
1 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 pinch crushed red pepper flakes
Pepita Parmesan (recipe follows), for serving
Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Rub the squash with 1 teaspoon olive oil and season with ¼ teaspoon salt and
¼ teaspoon pepper. Place the squash cut-side down on a rimmed baking sheet
and roast for 45 to 50 minutes, until tender. Remove and let cool until able to
touch, then use a fork to scrape out the spaghetti-like strands. Set aside.
   Make the sauce: Heat the remaining 1 tablespoon of olive oil in a large
rimmed skillet over medium heat and add the shallot and garlic. Sauté, stirring
frequently, for about 3 minutes, until soft and fragrant, taking care not to burn.
   Add the carrots and celery and cook for 4 to 5 minutes, until the vegetables
are softened. Add the tomato sauce, lentils, basil, oregano, red pepper flakes, and
½ cup water. Raise the heat to bring the mixture to a low boil, then reduce the
heat to low. Cover and cook for about 20 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the
lentils are tender. If the mixture is cooking too quickly, add more water to
prevent it from drying out. Add in the remaining ½ teaspoon of salt. Add more
salt and pepper to taste.
   Divide the spaghetti squash strands between two bowls and top with the lentil
Bolognese and additional garnishes, if using.

Low FODMAP Option:
Shallots are high in fructans. Omit and use shallot-infused olive oil (either use
store-bought Fody brand or make your own) in place of the regular olive oil, or
sub in ¼ cup scallion greens.
Garlic is high in FODMAP and fructans. Omit and use ½ cup chives, or sub
garlic-infused olive oil in place of the plain olive oil.
Celery is high FODMAP. Reduce to ⅔ medium celery stalk.
Tomato sauce may contain onion and garlic. Look for brands that contain just
tomato. If substituting with marinara sauce, then look for these low FODMAP
options if you are sensitive to fructans. We like Fody Tomato Basil Pasta Sauce,
Fody Marinara Pasta Sauce, and Rao’s Homemade Sensitive Marinara Sauce.
Dry red lentils have moderate GOS. Sub 1 cup canned lentils.
Supercharge It!
Top with the Pepita Parmesan, chopped fresh basil, and chopped fresh parsley.
7 PLANT POINTS

 Pepita Parmesan
½ cup slivered almonds (20 whole almonds)
¼ cup raw pepitas
3 tablespoons nutritional yeast
1 teaspoon salt
Place the almonds, pepitas, nutritional yeast, and salt in the base of a food
processor and process until a fine powder forms, taking care not to turn it into
almond butter. Store in the fridge for up to 2 weeks or in the freezer for up to 6
months.

Low FODMAP Option:
Slivered almonds are high in GOS. Decrease the quantity to 10 nuts.
Buffalo Chickpea Salad
We simply had to have this flavor in the four-week plan. Spicy buffalo chickpeas
mix with sweet hummus dressing. A match made in heaven!
Makes 2 salads
Sweet Hummus Dressing
¼ cup Pumpkin Hummus or other hummus
2 teaspoons 100% maple syrup
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar or freshly squeezed lemon juice
2 teaspoons hot water
Buffalo Chickpeas
½ cup canned chickpeas, drained and rinsed
2 teaspoons garlic-infused olive oil
1 tablespoon hot sauce, like Texas Pete
¼ teaspoon minced garlic
Pinch salt
Salad
4 cups chopped romaine lettuce
¼ avocado, sliced
¼ cup halved cherry tomatoes
Make the dressing: Whisk together the hummus, maple syrup, and vinegar until
creamy and smooth. Keep whisking while slowly adding in the hot water. The
dressing should be thick but pourable. Add more water as needed.
   Make the chickpeas: Toss the chickpeas with the infused olive oil, hot sauce,
garlic, and salt. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add the chickpeas and sauté for
3 minutes, or until the chickpeas start to dry out and are heated through. Use the
back of a spoon to gently mash some of the chickpeas together, keeping most of
them whole. Remove from the heat and set aside.
   Make the salad: Toss the romaine with the dressing, then gently toss in the
avocado, tomatoes, and buffalo chickpeas. Divide between two bowls and serve
immediately.

Low FODMAP Options:
Use the FODMAP-friendly Pumpkin Hummus in this recipe as most prepared
hummus will contain garlic and/or onion.
Limit chickpeas to a single ¼ cup serving per person.
Garlic is high in fructans. Substitute 1 teaspoon chives.
Make-Ahead Option:
Prepare the Sweet Hummus Dressing and Buffalo Chickpeas ahead of time.
Before serving, warm the chickpeas, then assemble as directed.
7 PLANT POINTS
Gumbo
While this recipe comes together easily, it does take time for the vegetables to
cook down and the gumbo to simmer. If that’s too much on a weeknight, then
add this recipe to your prep list for Sunday and plan on cooking just the rice that
night. Freeze half for use in Week 4 and place the remaining half in the fridge
until ready to eat.
Serves 4
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 cups uncooked brown rice
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium onion, diced
1 green bell pepper, diced
3 celery stalks, diced
3 garlic cloves, minced
Salt
¼ cup all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons smoked paprika
2 teaspoons dried thyme
1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 teaspoon dried oregano
4 cups vegetable broth or Biome Broth
One 14-ounce can fire-roasted tomatoes, drained
One 14-ounce can kidney beans, drained and rinsed
1½ cups frozen, sliced okra
2 tablespoons vegan Worcestershire sauce
Make the rice: Bring 4 cups water and a pinch salt to a boil in a large pot over
medium-high heat, then add the rice. Reduce the heat to low, cover, and let the
rice cook for about 45 minutes, until tender.
   Make the gumbo: Heat the olive oil in a large stockpot over medium heat.
Add the onion, bell pepper, celery, and garlic along with a pinch of salt and
cook, stirring occasionally, for about 15 minutes, until the vegetables are lightly
browned and cooked through.
   Sprinkle the flour on the vegetables and stir, cooking for 2 to 3 more minutes,
until the flour is slightly toasted and smells nutty. Add in the paprika, thyme,
black pepper, and oregano and stir together, cooking another 30 to 60 seconds,
until just fragrant.
   Add in the broth, tomatoes, beans, okra, and Worcestershire sauce and whisk
together to combine, trying to scrape up any browned bits of vegetable and flour
on the bottom of the pan. Raise the heat to medium-high and bring to a boil.
Once boiling, reduce the heat and simmer, stirring occasionally, until thick,
about 30 minutes.
   Divide 1 cup of the cooked rice between two bowls and top with Gumbo.
Reserve the remaining rice for Kimchi Fried Rice and freeze the remaining
Gumbo for dinner next week.

Low FODMAP Options:
Onion is high in fructans and has moderate GOS. Omit and sub ½ cup scallion
greens.
A quarter of a green bell pepper contains moderate FODMAPs. Reduce the
amount used in the recipe to ½ green bell pepper, or use a whole red bell pepper
instead of a green bell pepper.
Three celery stalks have moderate mannitol. Reduce to 1 celery stalk.
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and sub garlic-infused olive oil for the regular
olive oil.
Wheat flour is high in GOS and fructans. Sub gluten-free flour.
Kidney beans are high in GOS and fructans. Sub 1 cup chickpeas or canned
lentils.
Meal Prep Tip:
Both the rice and the gumbo make an appearance later in the plan. Save 2 cups
cooked rice for Kimchi Fried Rice (below) and freeze the remaining Gumbo for
dinner in Week 4.
If making this on Week 3, then make the full 1¼ cups of brown rice to use
leftovers for Kimchi Fried Rice (below). If just making the gumbo, then cook ½
cup of dry brown rice.
Supercharge It!
Top with chopped parsley.
7 PLANT POINTS
Kimchi Fried Rice
This fried rice gets a Fiber Fueled boost from the addition of kimchi, a Korean
staple of fermented cabbage and vegetables. Alex really likes Sunja’s Kimchi;
use it if you can find it.
Serves 2
One 16-ounce jar kimchi
2 teaspoons toasted sesame oil, plus more if needed
3 scallions, sliced
8 ounces firm tofu, drained and pressed
3 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon fresh grated ginger
2 bunches baby bok choy, thinly sliced
4 ounces shiitake mushrooms, thinly sliced
1 tablespoon tamari, plus more if needed
2 cups cooked and cooled brown rice, reserved from Gumbo
2 teaspoons rice wine vinegar
Drain the kimchi in a colander, reserving the liquid. Roughly chop the kimchi a
few times into bite-size pieces, then set aside.
   Heat the sesame oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the scallions
and cook, stirring frequently, for 2 to 3 minutes, until tender. Crumble in the tofu
and stir to combine. Cook for an additional 2 to 3 minutes, until lightly browned.
Stir in the garlic and ginger.
   Add in the bok choy and mushrooms and cook for another 2 to 3 minutes,
until the bok choy is bright green and tender.
   Add in the kimchi and tamari and cook until just heated through.
   Add in the rice, 1 tablespoon reserved kimchi brine, and the vinegar and cook,
stirring frequently, for 3 to 4 minutes, until the mixture is heated through. Season
to taste, adding more tamari, toasted sesame oil, or kimchi brine, as desired.
Serve immediately.

Low FODMAP Options:
Kimchi is high in fructans. Many kimchi brands contain garlic, so if you are
sensitive to fructans, then you can either omit the kimchi altogether or select a
different recipe for dinner tonight.
Use only the green parts of scallions for low FODMAP.
Garlic is high FODMAP and fructan. Omit and use 2 teaspoons garlic-infused
olive oil instead.
A 1-cup serving of bok choy is FODMAP friendly. Over 1⅓ cups per serving is
moderate in sorbitol.
Shiitake mushrooms are high in mannitol. Substitute oyster mushrooms or omit.
Supercharge It!
Top with sliced nori strips, sesame seeds, sliced scallions, or pickled ginger.
7 PLANT POINTS
Lentil Masala
It’s no secret that we are big fans of Indian food. Packed with fragrant,
antioxidant-rich spices, aromatics, vegetables, and pulses, Indian cuisine is a
great way to enjoy traditional Fiber Fueled cuisine. This simplified lentil masala
uses cashew cream, a delicious, dairy-free alternative that tastes just as rich and
luscious. If you haven’t made cashew cream before, this is one recipe that you’ll
likely turn to over and over again; it works great in any recipe that calls for
heavy cream.
Serves 2
Cilantro-Lime Rice
½ cup uncooked basmati or brown rice
Salt
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lime juice
¼ cup finely chopped cilantro
Lentils
2 teaspoons olive oil or Biome Broth
½ yellow or white onion, chopped
1 inch fresh ginger, grated or minced
2 garlic cloves, minced
Pinch salt and freshly ground black pepper
½ teaspoon garam masala
½ teaspoon chili powder
⅛ teaspoon ground cinnamon
2 tablespoons tomato paste
½ cup dried green or brown lentils
Cashew Cream
¼ cup raw cashews (20 whole cashews)
⅓ cup warm water
Freshly squeezed lime juice, for serving
Fresh cilantro, for serving
Make the rice: In a small saucepan, bring 1 cup of cold water to a boil over
medium-high heat. Add the rice, reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook
according to the package instructions, until the rice is tender. Stir in ¼ teaspoon
salt, 1 tablespoon of the lime juice, and the cilantro. Set aside.
   Make the lentils: Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add in
the onion, ginger, and garlic and cook for 5 to 7 minutes, until softened. Add the
salt and pepper along with the garam masala, chili powder, and cinnamon. Cook
for 1 minute, until fragrant.
   Add the tomato paste and cook for 1 more minute, until dark red and fragrant.
Add the lentils and 2 cups cold water, then bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to
medium-low, cover, and cook for 30 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the
lentils are tender and most of the water has been absorbed.
   Make the cashew cream: Combine the cashews and warm water in a blender
and blend until very creamy and thick. Depending on the power of your blender,
this may take up to 5 minutes.
   Stir the cashew cream and remaining 1 tablespoon lime juice into the lentils
and season to taste, adding more salt as needed. Serve over the reserved cilantro-
lime rice, topping with more cilantro and lime juice as desired.

Low FODMAP Option:
Yellow or white onions have moderate GOS and are high in fructans. Omit and
substitute with ¼ cup scallion greens.
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and use 2 teaspoons garlic-infused olive oil in
place of the regular olive oil.
Some garam masala contains garlic and onion, so make sure to check the
ingredient list.
Lentils have moderate GOS. Reduce to ¼ cup dry green or brown lentils and
reduce the water by half.
20 cashews is high FODMAP. Omit the cashew cream for a less creamy version
of the Lentil Masala.
6 PLANT POINTS
SNACKS, DRINKS, AND DESSERTS


The Green Drink
This tart drink is a mix between a fruit smoothie and a limeade! Very refreshing,
it’s a great midafternoon pick-me-up. For a heartier snack, pair with Turmeric
Energy Bites or Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites.
Serves 2
2 cups chopped honeydew melon*
4 kiwis, peeled
Zest and juice of 1 lime
10 mint leaves
2 cups crushed ice
Place the honeydew, kiwi, lime zest, lime juice, mint, ice, and ½ cup water into a
blender and process until smooth. Divide between two glasses and serve.

Low FODMAP Options:
Reduce melon to 1 cup total for the recipe, or use 1½ cups cantaloupe for the
entire recipe.
4 PLANT POINTS
Speedy Edamame
We call this Speedy Edamame because it comes together in just 5 minutes and is
the perfect plant-powered snack. Enjoy with salt, or a pinch of chili powder or
red pepper flakes if you like things spicy.
Serves 2
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup frozen or fresh edamame in pods
Coarse finishing salt
Place 3 cups water and the salt in a medium saucepan and bring to a boil over
high heat. Add the edamame and cook for about 5 minutes, until the edamame
are tender and easily release from their pod. Drain and toss with a pinch of
coarse finishing salt, like kosher salt or fleur de sel. Serve warm or cold.
Make-Ahead Tip:
The edamame can be made ahead of time and enjoyed cold or reheated in the
microwave right before eating.
1 PLANT POINT
Turmeric Energy Bites
Turmeric contains the plant compound curcumin, which is known for its anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant properties. It is also what gives curry its vibrant
yellow color. We added it to these bites with a touch of lemon for a sweet ball
that’s perfect for a snack between meals or a sweet after-dinner treat. Once it hits
your lips . . . it’s so good!
Makes 16 to 18 bites
1⅓ cups rolled oats
¼ cup chopped or sliced almonds
¼ cup hemp seeds
½ cup almond or peanut butter
¼ cup 100% maple syrup
1 teaspoon lemon zest
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
Pinch salt
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
Add the oats, almonds, and hemp seeds to a medium bowl. Mix in the almond
butter, maple syrup, lemon zest, lemon juice, turmeric, salt, and pepper until well
combined.
   Cover a small tray or plate with parchment paper. Roll the mixture into
tablespoon-size balls and place on a parchment paper–lined tray.
   Place the tray in the refrigerator to chill until set, then transfer to an airtight
container and keep in the fridge for up to 1 week or the freezer for up to 2
months.

Low FODMAP Option:
Almonds are higher in FODMAPs (GOS) but a serving size of 10 nuts or 1
tablespoon of almond butter are okay if you’re sensitive. One and a half
tablespoons of almond butter has moderate GOS. Please pay attention to how
you feel when increasing certain foods higher in FODMAPs this week and make
adjustments to the recipes with the lower FODMAP options as necessary.
Peanut butter is lower in FODMAPs than almond butter.
Supercharge It!
Add 1 tablespoon flaxseeds or chia seeds (or both!) to get more omega-3 fatty
acids and fiber.
4 PLANT POINTS
Chocolate Banana Nice Cream
You scream, I scream, we all scream for nice cream! This chocolate banana nice
cream is the perfect after-dinner dessert.


   Note: To make a cherry version, remove the chocolate and add in ⅓ cup
frozen pitted cherries instead.
Serves 2
4 peeled, frozen, chopped bananas
1 to 2 teaspoons cocoa powder
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
Add the bananas, cocoa powder, and vanilla to the base of a food processor and
blend until very creamy and the consistency of soft serve.


Note: Leftovers don’t keep well, so halve the recipe if you don’t plan on eating
the entire recipe in one sitting.


Low FODMAP Options:
If you’re using cherries instead of cocoa powder, reduce the serving to 2 cherries
if you are sensitive to fructose.
1 medium unripe banana is considered low FODMAP. Ripe bananas (slightly
brown) are higher in fructose. One-third of a ripe banana has the green light, and
½ of a ripe banana has moderate fructans.
2 PLANT POINTS
Mushroom Hot Cocoa
Keep calm and mushroom on. We know that mushrooms in cocoa sounds a little
odd, but these aren’t your traditional mushrooms! We like a single powder or a
blend of powdered Reishi, Lion’s Mane, and/or Cordyceps as these medicinal
mushrooms are adaptogens and have been shown to help with stress, energy
levels, and more restful sleep.
   Adding the peanut or almond butter helps to make this hot cocoa very rich,
and the added fat helps with satiety.


                           Pro Tip: Medicinal Mushrooms
       For the mushroom hot cocoa, choose the mushroom that fits your goals: Immune boosting—
                         Reishi; Focus—Lion’s Mane; Energy—Cordyceps.




Serves 2
2 teaspoons mushroom powder
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup
1 tablespoon peanut butter or almond butter
2 tablespoons unsweetened cocoa powder
Pinch salt
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
2½ cups dairy-free milk
Add the mushroom powder, maple syrup, peanut butter, cocoa powder, salt,
cinnamon, and milk to a blender and puree until creamy.
   Place the blended cocoa mixture into a small saucepan and warm over
medium heat, whisking vigorously right before serving until frothy and well
blended.
   Taste and adjust the flavor as needed. Divide into two mugs and serve warm.
3 PLANT POINTS
Week 4
You should feel proud of how far you’ve come. This is the fourth week! You are
almost ready to transition into the FF365 program. Make sure to keep track of
your favorite recipes and any food sensitivities that you see coming up. Post
your results to #fiberfueled4weeks. Let’s embolden and support others to take on
the same quest that you have—to improve your health through diet and lifestyle.

WEEK 4 SHOPPING LIST



Produce
□ 1 medium piece fresh ginger
□ 4 large lemons
□ 3 large green bell peppers
□ 2 yellow bell peppers
□ 1 large orange bell pepper
□ 1 ounce dried shiitake mushrooms
□ 3 medium yellow or white onions
□ 1 red onion
□ 1 pound carrots
□ 1 pound celery hearts
□ 1 large cucumber
□ 1 large mango
□ 1 small jicama
□ 2 pints cherry tomatoes
□ One 10-ounce bag spinach leaves
□ 6 bananas
□ 2 kiwis
□ One 5-ounce package leafy salad greens
□ One 100-gram container broccoli sprouts
□ 4 large avocados
□ 1 bunch fresh chives
□ 2 bunches kale (lactino or curly)
□ 2 jalapeños
□ 2 bunches fresh cilantro
□ 1 bunch fresh basil
□ 1 pint strawberries
□ 1 pint berries of choice
□ One 8-ounce bag dates
□ One 10-ounce package walnuts
□ One 5-ounce package cashews
□ One 8-ounce package almonds
□ 5 limes
□ 1 head garlic
□ 2 large oranges
□ 1 large grapefruit
□ 2 bunches scallions
□ 1 head broccoli
□ 1 large tomato
□ One 5-ounce bag arugula
□ One 64-ounce container almond milk
□ One 2-ounce jar sesame seeds
□ One 15-ounce can or container low-sodium vegetable broth
□ 8 ounces baked tofu
□ 1 package chai tea (in bags)
□ One 8-ounce package tempeh
□ One 1-ounce bag wakame
□ One 16-ounce bag brown lentils
□ Four 15-ounce cans chickpeas
□ One 15-ounce can white beans
□ One 15-ounce can coconut milk
□ One 15-ounce container Sriracha
□ One 15-ounce container bread crumbs
□ One 15-ounce can tomato sauce
□ Three 15-ounce cans diced tomatoes
□ Two 15-ounce cans black beans
□ One 15-ounce can kidney beans
□ One 15-ounce can pinto beans
□ Two 15-ounce cans cannellini beans
□  Jarred marinara sauce (Rao’s and Fody are low FODMAP; see Chickpea
  Meatballs for more details)
□ 1 package sub rolls
□ 1 package whole-grain buns
□ 2 ounces soba noodles
□   One 8-ounce bag elbow noodles
□   One 8-ounce bag dried pasta of choice
□   One 8-ounce bag whole-grain spaghetti
□   One 14-ounce bag white rice
□   Bay leaves
□   Garlic powder
□   Dry mustard
□   1-ounce package nori sheets
□   1 loaf sourdough bread
□   1 16-ounce package firm tofu, packed in water


Week 4—Drinks, Snacks, and Dessert
Remember, these recipes are to be enjoyed whenever the moment feels right.
Drink Recipe: Turmeric Latte
Snack Recipe #1: White Bean Hummus with vegetables
Snack Recipe #2: Omega-3 Balls
Dessert Recipe #1: Strawberry Cheesecake Bites
Dessert Recipe #2: Snicker Bites


Week 4—Quick-Fix Menu
Friendly Note: Now that we’re four weeks into the plan, it’s okay to increase the
amount of berries you eat.
Quick-Fix Breakfast: Superfood Smoothie Bowl
Quick-Fix Lunch: Chickpea Meatball Sandwich
Quick-Fix Dinner: Leftover 4-Bean Chili with White Bean Hummus on
   sourdough
Quick-Fix Snack: Handful of almonds
Quick-Fix Dessert: Bowl of berries


Week 4 Meal Prep


Week 4 Recommended Prep
White Bean Hummus
Nourishing Buddha Bowl
Omega-3 Balls
Week 4 Optional Prep
Chickpea Meatballs for dinner on Day 3 and lunch again on Day 4. Extra
  meatballs can be used for quick-fix lunch anytime this week.
4-Bean Chili
Cook the lentils ahead of time for Lentil Sloppy Joes for dinner on Day 5
Banana Baked Oatmeal

DAY 1 (USUALLY SUNDAY)

    Meal        Recipe                        Plant Points
    Breakfast   Gluten-Free Pancakes          2
    Lunch       Supercharged Miso Soup        8
    Dinner      4-Bean Chili                  7–10



DAY 2

    Meal        Recipe                                                Plant Points
    Breakfast   Superfood Smoothie Bowl with Crispy Oat Granola       12
    Lunch       Nourishing Buddha Bowl with Tahini Dressing           6
    Dinner      Nothing Fishy Sushi Wraps                             6



DAY 3

    Meal        Recipe                                                       Plant
                                                                             Points
    Breakfast   Banana Baked Oatmeal                                         4
    Lunch       Nothing Fishy Sushi Bowl                                     6
    Dinner      Chickpea Meatballs Pasta Marinara and Quick Garlic           5
                Broccoli



DAY 4

    Meal        Recipe                                       Plant Points
    Breakfast   Creamy Chai Oats                             5
    Lunch       Chickpea Meatballs on sourdough sub roll     4
    Dinner      Leftover Gumbo with brown rice               8
DAY 5

    Meal        Recipe                                 Plant Points
    Breakfast   Banana Baked Oatmeal                   4
    Lunch       Leftover 4-Bean Chili or Chili Mac     7+
    Dinner      Lentil Sloppy Joes with Jicama Fries   7



DAY 6

    Meal        Recipe                                                     Plant
                                                                           Points
    Breakfast   Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie                     4+
    Lunch       Chickpea and Avocado Sandwich with Citrus and Mint         7+
                Salad
    Dinner      Tuscan Kale Soup with Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad            13–16



DAY 7

    Meal        Recipe                                                       Plant
                                                                             Points
    Breakfast   Spicy Breakfast Tacos                                        6
    Lunch       Leftover Tuscan Kale Soup with sourdough bread and White     14–16
                Bean Hummus
    Dinner      Sunday Pasta                                                 6+
BREAKFAST


Banana Baked Oatmeal
Baked oatmeal is one of our favorite warm breakfasts. While this one is
delicious right out of the pan, we recommend enjoying it warm, topped with cold
almond milk, chopped nuts, and extra berries.
  To prepare ahead, assemble everything the night before to bake in the
morning or prep on Sunday and reheat with a little more almond milk as it will
dry out slightly in the fridge.
Serves 4, with leftovers for later in the week
1 large banana, sliced
1½ cups quick-cooking oats
2 tablespoons ground flaxseeds
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
1 teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
¾ cup almond milk or other dairy-free milk
⅓ cup 100% maple syrup
2 tablespoons organic sunflower oil
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¼ cup chopped walnuts or other chopped nut
Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly spray an 8 x 8-inch baking dish.
   Place the sliced bananas in a single row on the bottom of the pan and set
aside.
   In a medium bowl, whisk together the oats, flaxseeds, cinnamon, baking
powder, and salt.
   In a separate medium bowl, whisk together the almond milk, maple syrup,
sunflower oil, and vanilla. Add to the oat mixture and stir together until
combined. Stir in the chopped nuts and gently top the sliced bananas in the
baking dish with the oatmeal. Place in the oven and bake for 30 minutes, or until
golden brown and set.

Low FODMAP Options:
Quick-cooking oats have moderate GOS and fructans. Sub rolled oats.
Supercharge It!
Top with berries, almond milk, and chopped nuts.
4 PLANT POINTS
Creamy Chai Oats
All the flavors of spicy, comforting chai in your morning bowl of creamy oats.
Makes 2 servings
1 chai tea bag
1½ cups unsweetened almond milk
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground cardamom
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
1 cup old-fashioned oats
1 teaspoon ground flaxseeds
1 teaspoon chia seeds
1 tablespoon hemp seeds
1 banana, mashed
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Pinch salt
1 teaspoon 100% maple syrup (optional)
In a medium saucepan, bring the chai tea bag, ½ cup water, almond milk,
cinnamon, cardamom, and nutmeg to a boil over medium heat. Reduce the heat
to low and simmer for 2 minutes, stirring occasionally.
   Remove the tea bag and bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Stir in the
oats, flax, chia, and hemp seeds. Reduce the heat to medium-low and cook for
about 3 minutes, until the oats are thick.
   Stir in the mashed banana and cook for 1 more minute. Remove from the heat,
stir in the vanilla and salt, then cover and allow to finish cooking for 5 minutes.
Stir in the maple syrup, if using, and serve.

Low FODMAP Options:
A ripe banana is high in fructose, but a greener banana will be lower FODMAP.
Supercharge It!
Top this oatmeal with your favorite berries for extra sweetness and Plant Points.
Make-Ahead Tips:
You can make this ahead of time and store in an airtight container in the fridge.
Enjoy warm or cold.
5 PLANT POINTS
LUNCH


Supercharged Miso Soup
Miso is a paste made from fermented soybeans and very common in Asian
cuisine. This soup is warm, comforting, and delicious.
Serves 2
2 ounces soba noodles
2 cups Biome Broth
1 tablespoon wakame seaweed
¼ cup white miso paste
½ cup chopped baby spinach
½ cup chopped scallions
¼ cup firm tofu, drained and cubed
¼ cup rehydrated shiitake mushrooms
Bring a medium pot of water to a boil over medium-high heat. Cook the soba
noodles according to the package instructions, then drain and rinse with cool
water to stop the cooking. Set aside.
   In the same pot, bring 2 cups of cold water and the broth to a boil over
medium-high heat. Add the wakame, reduce the heat, and simmer over low heat
for about 5 minutes.
   In a small bowl, combine the miso with 1 to 2 teaspoons warm water to thin it
out to the consistency of a thick, creamy sauce. Set aside.
   Add the baby spinach, scallions, tofu, and shiitake mushrooms to the broth.
Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and
simmer for 5 minutes.
   Remove from the heat and stir in the miso paste and cooked soba noodles.
Serve.

Low FODMAP Options:
The white parts of scallions are high in fructans. Use only the green parts.
Supercharge Options:
Top with sesame seeds and/or sliced scallions for an added texture bonus and
flavor boost.
8 PLANT POINTS
Nothing Fishy Sushi Wraps
Nothing fishy here! This might be one of our favorite recipes in the entire book.
Be warned, the sriracha mayo is addictive; enjoy it here, on sandwiches, and
anywhere else you want a spicy hit of creamy flavor.
   We call these wraps, but they are assembled like a lettuce wrap. Pile
everything high onto toasted nori sheets, loosely wrap, and enjoy. We like to
serve these disassembled, with bowls of all the toppings for everyone to top and
eat as they choose.
   This recipe makes enough for leftovers as Nothing Fishy Sushi Bowls. They
are exactly like they sound: Toss everything in a bowl, cover with leftover
sriracha mayo, and enjoy.
Serves 4, with leftovers for Nothing Fishy Sushi Bowls
Sriracha Mayo
½ cup raw cashews, soaked in 1 cup boiling water for 10 minutes and drained
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lime juice
1 tablespoon sriracha
2 teaspoons 100% maple syrup
2 teaspoons tamari
½ teaspoon salt
1½ cups white rice (short-grain rice will stick together more easily, but any rice
will work)
2 teaspoons tamari
6 toasted nori sheets, cut into quarters
1 cucumber, peeled and sliced into strips
1 large ripe mango, peeled and sliced into strips
8 ounces baked tofu, teriyaki flavor, sliced
1 large avocado, pitted and sliced thin
Sesame seeds, for topping
Make the mayo: Add the cashews to the base of a blender with ¼ cup cold water,
the lime juice, sriracha, maple syrup, tamari, and salt. Blend until very creamy
and smooth, scraping down the sides as needed.
   Assemble the wraps: Bring 3 cups of water to a boil over medium-high heat in
a large pot and add the rice. Reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook for 15 to 20
minutes, until the rice is tender (you might have to add a few minutes of cook
time if you’re using brown rice). Toss the warm rice with the vinegar and tamari.
If you are using leftover cooked rice, add in a little warm water so the rice sticks
together easily.
   Press together a small handful of warm rice to make a ball, then press on top
of a quartered sheet of toasted nori. Top with the cucumber, mango, tofu, and
avocado.
   Drizzle with the mayo and sprinkle with sesame seeds. Fold the wraps
together and enjoy, dipping into more spicy mayo as desired!
   To make bowls, toss all the remaining ingredients together.

Low FODMAP Options:
Cashews are high in GOS and have moderate fructans. The amount of cashews
used in this recipe may still be low enough for you to tolerate if you are sensitive
to GOS or fructans.
A quarter cup mango has moderate fructose; ½ cup has high fructose. If sensitive
to fructose, reduce the amount so that only 3 tablespoons are portioned into 1
serving (¾ cup total).
Half an avocado is high in sorbitol. If sensitive to sorbitol, reduce so that only ⅛
avocado is portioned into 1 serving.
Make Ahead Tips:
For the Nothing Fishy Sushi Bowls, pack rice, toppings, and leftover sriracha
mayo separately into airtight containers in the fridge. When ready to assemble,
toss everything together and enjoy.
6 PLANT POINTS
DINNER


4-Bean Chili
You’ll enjoy this 4-bean chili for dinner one night, then as Chili Mac later in the
week. For a heartier meal, serve over cooked grains of choice, like quinoa. This
recipe contains many high FODMAP ingredients, so sub Butternut Squash and
Quinoa Chili if necessary.
Makes 6 servings
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 white or yellow onion, chopped
1 yellow bell pepper, chopped
2 garlic cloves, minced
3 tablespoons chili powder, plus more to taste
1 tablespoon ground cumin, plus more to taste
2 teaspoons dried oregano, plus more to taste
2 cups low-sodium vegetable broth
1 cup tomato sauce
One 15-ounce can diced tomatoes
One 15-ounce can black beans
One 15-ounce can kidney beans
One 15-ounce can pinto beans
One 15-ounce can cannellini beans
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
Heat the olive oil in a large saucepan over medium heat until shimmering. Add
the onion, bell pepper, and garlic and cook for 8 to 10 minutes, stirring
occasionally, until the onion is translucent. Add the chili powder, cumin, and
oregano and cook for 30 to 60 seconds, until fragrant.
   Add the broth, tomato sauce, tomatoes, black beans, kidney beans, pinto
beans, cannellini beans, and salt and raise the heat to medium-high to bring to a
boil. Reduce the heat to low and simmer uncovered for 30 to 45 minutes, stirring
occasionally, until the mixture is thick and the flavors have developed. Season to
taste, as desired.
   Serve, reserving 3 cups of the chili to make Chili Mac (see below).
 Chili Mac
Easy Cheese Sauce
¼ cup cashews, soaked in boiling water for 30 minutes, then drained
½ orange bell pepper, roughly chopped
½ cup unsweetened almond milk
1 heaping tablespoon nutritional yeast, plus more to taste
1 teaspoon chili powder, plus more to taste
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
Chili Mac
2 cups cooked elbow noodles
3 cups reserved 4-Bean Chili
Place the cashews, bell pepper, almond milk, nutritional yeast, chili powder, and
salt in the base of a food processor and puree until very creamy and smooth.
Season to taste, adding in more salt, chili powder, or nutritional yeast as desired.
   Cook the noodles according to the package instructions until al dente, then
drain and set aside.
   Warm the reserved chili, then add in the cooked noodles and cheese sauce.
Stir together and enjoy!

Low FODMAP Options:
Tomato sauce may contain onion and garlic. If you are sensitive to fructans, look
for these low FODMAP tomato sauce options: We like Fody Tomato Basil Pasta
Sauce, Fody Marinara Pasta Sauce, and Rao’s Homemade Sensitive Marinara
Sauce.
Cashews are high in GOS and have moderate fructans. You can sub the ¼ cup
cashews with ½ cup walnuts. Soak the walnuts overnight before using, then
make according to the recipe above.
If you’re sensitive to fructans in the wheat in the elbow noodles, sub quinoa or
rice-based pasta.
Black beans are high in GOS and have moderate fructans.
Kidney beans are high in GOS and fructans.
Pinto beans are high in GOS and fructans.
Cannellini beans are high FODMAP.
Meal Prep Tip:
Make this chili on Sunday to enjoy for dinner on Sunday and lunch on Thursday,
with the option for Chili Mac instead of chili that day.
Supercharge It!
Top with sliced scallions, chopped cilantro, and sliced jalapeños.
7+ PLANT POINTS
Chickpea Meatballs
You’ll meal-prep these meatballs to be used with pasta, marinara sauce, and
quick garlic broccoli for dinner one night, then tucked into a sub roll with the
remaining pasta sauce for lunch the next day.
   Any leftovers can be individually frozen, then stored in the freezer. Note that
these will hold their shape when warmed through but may start to crumble if
placed in sauce for a long period of time.
Makes 18 meatballs
1½ tablespoons ground flaxseed
3 cups canned chickpeas, drained and rinsed (½ cup serving is yellow light,
   GOS)
¾ cup walnuts
¾ cup bread crumbs, plus more as needed
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1½ teaspoons dried oregano
1½ teaspoons dried basil
1½ teaspoons dried parsley
¾ teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper
Pasta Marinara
6 to 8 ounces dried pasta of your choice
2 cups marinara sauce
6 Chickpea Meatballs
Pepita Parmesan (optional)
Sandwich
1 cup marinara sauce
6 Chickpea Meatballs
2 sub rolls
Preheat the oven to 450°F. Lightly oil a rimmed baking sheet or line with
parchment paper and set aside.
  Mix together ¼ cup water and the ground flaxseeds in a bowl and set aside to
gel. Place the chickpeas and walnuts in the base of a food processor and pulse
until very finely chopped.
   Remove the chickpea mixture from the food processor and place in a large
bowl. Add the flaxseed mixture, bread crumbs, olive oil, oregano, basil, and
parsley. Stir together until the mixture is combined. It should stick together
easily. If it’s too sticky, add in more bread crumbs. If it’s too dry, add a little
more oil or water. Add salt and pepper to taste.
   Scoop out 1 tablespoon of the mixture at a time, roll into a ball, and place on
the prepared baking sheet. Drizzle with more olive oil for crispier meatballs,
then bake for 20 minutes, or until golden brown.
   To serve with pasta, cook the pasta according to the package instructions.
Warm the marinara sauce in a medium saucepan and right before serving, stir
together with the meatballs. Serve with the cooked pasta and Pepita Parmesan, if
desired.
   To serve as a sandwich, warm the sauce and the meatballs, then toss to just
combine. Stuff into a toasted (or untoasted) sub roll and enjoy!
3 PLANT POINTS

Low FODMAP Option:
Limit serving of meatballs to 1½ meatballs if sensitive to GOS. Two chickpea
meatballs are considered low FODMAP.
Tomato sauce may contain onion and garlic. If you are sensitive to fructans, look
for these low FODMAP tomato sauce options: We like Fody Tomato Basil Pasta
Sauce, Fody Marinara Pasta Sauce, and Rao’s Homemade Sensitive Marinara
Sauce.
Quick Garlic Broccoli
This is less of a recipe and more of a serving suggestion. Steamed broccoli
tossed with a little olive oil, minced garlic, salt, pepper . . . and dry mustard.
While steaming does lead to the deactivation of myrosinase and therefore stops
sulforaphane formation, the addition of dry mustard to cooked broccoli provides
a natural source of the enzyme; you get the same benefits of eating it cooked as
you would raw.
   We recommend using a Microplane grater or garlic press to get the garlic very
fine, as you will be enjoying it raw and large pieces of raw garlic can be
unpleasant. If you don’t own a garlic press or grater, finely mince the garlic with
a knife, then use the wide blade to press over the minced garlic, rubbing the
blade back and forth to form a paste.
Serves 2
2 cups broccoli florets
1 garlic clove, very finely minced
1 to 2 teaspoons olive oil
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
½ teaspoon dry mustard
Bring a pot of water fitted with a steamer basket to a boil over X heat. Add the
broccoli florets and cook for 5 to 7 minutes, until just fork tender, taking care not
to overcook.
   Remove from the pot and immediately toss with the garlic, olive oil, salt,
pepper, and dry mustard. The warmth of the broccoli will gently heat the garlic
and oil. Enjoy as is, or at room temperature.

Low FODMAP Option:
Three-quarters cup broccoli florets is low FODMAP. If you’re sensitive to
fructose, reduce the total amount of broccoli to 1½ cups.
Omit the garlic and use garlic-infused olive oil.
2 PLANT POINTS
Lentil Sloppy Joes
We designed these sandwiches for evenings when you need something healthy,
hearty, and filling.
Serves 2
¼ cup brown or green lentils, rinsed and drained
1 teaspoon olive oil
¼ cup finely chopped onion
½ carrot, finely chopped
½ red bell pepper, finely chopped
¼ cup canned diced tomatoes
2 teaspoons smoked paprika
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 teaspoon 100% maple syrup
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon apple cider vinegar
¼ teaspoon salt
2 whole-grain buns, for serving
Jicama Fries, for serving
Add the lentils to a medium saucepan and cover with ¾ cup water. Bring to a
boil over medium-high heat, reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer for 25
minutes, or until the lentils are tender.
   Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the onion,
carrot, and bell pepper and cook for 5 minutes, or until soft.
   Stir in the cooked lentils, tomatoes, paprika, and garlic powder. Cook, stirring
occasionally, for another 2 to 3 minutes, until warmed through, then whisk in the
tomato paste, maple syrup, Dijon, vinegar, and salt. Simmer for an additional 5
to 10 minutes, until hot and thickened.
   Serve on toasted buns with jicama fries.

Low FODMAP Options:
Onion is moderate in fructans. Sub ¼ cup sliced green scallions.
Garlic powder is high in fructans. Omit and use 1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive
oil.
Supercharge It!
Add sauerkraut, pickles, fresh onion, scallions, or avocado to your sandwich.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Cooking the lentils ahead of time will make this recipe come together quickly.
6 PLANT POINTS
Jicama Fries
Jicama is a round root vegetable with a starchy inside that is popular in Mexican
cuisine. Tossed with a few classic seasonings, it’s our fun twist on baked french
fries!
Serves 2
1 small jicama (2½ cups), peeled and sliced into matchsticks
1½ teaspoons olive oil
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
½ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil or parchment
paper and set aside.
   Place the sliced jicama in a large bowl and add the olive oil. Add in the salt,
smoked paprika, garlic powder, and black pepper. Toss until well coated and
place in a single layer on the prepared baking sheet.
   Bake for 20 minutes, or until slightly crisp. Remove from the oven and serve.

Low FODMAP Options:
A ½-cup serving of fries is low FODMAP.
Omit the garlic powder if sensitive to fructans or garlic.
1 PLANT POINT
Chickpea and Avocado Sandwich
This simple deli-inspired salad sandwich is perfect for busy weekdays. Make at
night, then pack separately from sliced sourdough bread to assemble right before
eating.
Serves 2
1 cup chickpeas, rinsed and drained
1 large avocado, pitted and roughly chopped
¼ cup chopped cilantro
2 tablespoons finely chopped red onion
1 teaspoon olive oil
Juice of 1 lime
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more to taste
4 slices sourdough bread, toasted, if desired
Place the chickpeas and avocado in a medium bowl and mash together using a
fork or potato masher. Add the cilantro, onion, olive oil, lime juice, salt, and
pepper. Season to taste as desired, then serve between toasted sourdough and
supercharge toppings of your choice.
Supercharge It!
Add spinach or arugula leaves, microgreens or broccoli sprouts, or sliced tomato.

Low FODMAP Options:
1 cup chickpeas has moderate GOS. Reduce to ½ cup.
1 whole avocado is high in sorbitol. Reduce to ¼ avocado and add 2 tablespoons
Dijon mustard.
Red onion is high in fructans. Sub 1 tablespoon scallions or chives.
4 PLANT POINTS
Tuscan Kale Soup
This one-pot soup is thick and oh so satisfying, perfect for weeknights.
Serves 2
1½ tablespoons olive oil or garlic-infused olive oil
½ small white onion, chopped
2 celery ribs, chopped
1 carrot, chopped
½ teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
1 teaspoon dried oregano
½ teaspoon dried basil
½ teaspoon dried thyme
Pinch crushed red pepper flakes, more or less depending on spice preference
One 14.5-ounce can diced tomatoes
2 cups Biome Broth
½ cup uncooked quinoa
1 bay leaf
2 large handfuls chopped and cleaned kale
Half of a 14.5-ounce can white beans, such as cannellini beans, great northern
   beans, or butter beans, drained and rinsed
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more as needed
Heat the olive oil over medium heat in a medium or large pot or Dutch oven.
Add the onion, celery, carrot, and salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 3 to 5
minutes, until the onion becomes translucent and the vegetables begin to soften.
   Add the oregano, basil, thyme, red pepper flakes, and tomatoes with their
juice. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 1 to 2 minutes, until well combined.
   Add the broth, 1 cup water, the quinoa and bay leaf. Raise the heat up to
medium-high, then bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer for
20 to 25 minutes to allow the flavors to develop.
   Uncover, stir in the kale and beans, and cook for about 5 minutes, until the
greens are just wilted. Remove bay leaf, season with pepper and more salt, as
needed, and serve.

Low FODMAP Option:
Onions are high in fructans. Omit the onion and replace with ½ cup scallions.
White beans are high in GOS. Sub ½ can chickpeas.
Supercharge It!
Top this soup with fresh herbs. We think basil and parsley will taste the best!
Make-Ahead Tips:
Make sure to have your Biome Broth prepared ahead of time. For faster meal
prep, chop all vegetables ahead of time and store in an airtight container in the
fridge.
8 PLANT POINTS
Sunday Pasta
Growing up in an Italian household, Alex always associates Sunday evenings
with family and piping-hot bowls of pasta. This Sunday dinner combines a few
of our fiber-fueled favorites: tempeh sausage, arugula-lemon pesto, roasted
tomatoes, and cashew cream. It takes longer than some of the other recipes to
come together, but the extra effort is worth it.
   The addition of cashew cream is optional, but it makes for an even more
luscious dinner. Cashew cream thickens considerably once cooled, so reheat
with a few tablespoons of water to thin.
Serves 4, with leftovers to be enjoyed as desired
Roasted Tomatoes
1 pint cherry tomatoes
1 teaspoon olive oil
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
8 ounces whole-grain spaghetti
Tempeh Sausage
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 ounces tempeh, crumbled
1 teaspoon dried fennel
½ teaspoon dried basil
½ teaspoon dried oregano
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
½ teaspoon dried sage
1 garlic clove, minced
1 tablespoon tamari
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
Arugula-Lemon Pesto
3 cups packed arugula
½ cup walnuts
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
¼ cup vegetable broth or water
⅛ teaspoon salt, plus more if desired
⅛ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, plus more if desired
1 tablespoon olive oil (optional)
Cashew Cream (optional), for serving
Make the roasted tomatoes: Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Toss the cherry tomatoes with the olive oil and a pinch of salt and pepper,
then place on a rimmed baking sheet. Roast for about 25 minutes, until very
reduced and soft. Set aside.
   Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil over medium-high heat and add the
pasta. Cook until just al dente, reserve 1 cup pasta water, and drain. Set aside.
   Make the sausage: Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add
the tempeh and cook for about 5 minutes, stirring often, until the tempeh is
browned and crispy.
   Add the dried fennel, basil, oregano, red pepper flakes, sage, garlic, tamari,
maple syrup and lemon juice. Cook, stirring occasionally, for another 2 to 3
minutes and set aside.
   Make the pesto: Place the arugula, walnuts, and nutritional yeast in the base of
a food processor and blend until very finely chopped. With the motor running,
add in the lemon juice, vegetable broth, salt, and pepper. Drizzle in the olive oil,
if desired. Add more salt and pepper to taste.
   To assemble, toss the cooked spaghetti with the tomatoes, tempeh sausage,
pesto, and cashew cream, if using. Thin with the reserved pasta water, adding 1
tablespoon at a time if needed, until creamy. Serve immediately.

Low FODMAP Options:
5 cherry tomatoes per serving is low in fructans, so if sensitive, then reduce to
only 20 cherry tomatoes total, or omit.
Whole-grain spaghetti is high in fructans. Reduce to ½ cup cooked per serving
for FODMAP friendly, or use an alternative pasta option, like quinoa.
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and sub 1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil for
the sausage and 2 teaspoons for the pesto.
The cashews in the cashew cream are high in GOS and have moderate fructans.
Omit the cashew cream if sensitive.
Supercharge It!
Top with Pepita Parmesan, chopped basil, or chopped parsley.
6 PLANT POINTS
DRINKS, SNACKS, AND DESSERTS


Turmeric Latte
Fresh turmeric is often used in turmeric lattes, but this version uses a dried
powder that you likely already have in your pantry. Black pepper might sound
weird in a latte, but combining black pepper with the curcumin in turmeric
enhances curcumin absorption by up to 2,000 percent, as we discussed in
Chapter 4. As the weeks progress, sub in canned coconut milk for a very rich,
creamy, and satiating beverage.
Serves 2
2 cups unsweetened almond milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 tablespoon 100% maple syrup
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
Pinch ground nutmeg
Pinch ground cardamom
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
In a small pot over medium heat, combine the milk, vanilla, maple syrup,
turmeric, cinnamon, nutmeg, cardamom, and pepper. Whisk together and bring
to a low boil, then reduce the heat to low and simmer for 5 minutes, stirring
occasionally.
   Divide into two mugs and serve.
   To make an iced latte, place the milk, vanilla, maple syrup, turmeric,
cinnamon, nutmeg, cardamom, and pepper in a mason jar with a lid and shake
vigorously until well combined. Serve over ice, adding more maple syrup as
desired.

Low FODMAP Options:
After Week 2, sub in 1 cup canned coconut milk for the almond milk for a
creamier, richer latte.
1 PLANT POINT
White Bean Hummus
All the flavors of Italian pesto in a protein-packed bean dip! Serve with crunchy
raw vegetable sticks, seedy crackers, or on toasted sourdough bread.
Makes 4 servings
Half of a 14.5-ounce can white beans (navy, cannellini, great northern), drained
   and rinsed
½ cup fresh basil
1 garlic clove
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon tahini
¼ teaspoon salt
Juice of ½ large lemon
Place the white beans, basil, garlic, olive oil, tahini, salt, and lemon juice in the
base of a food processor and process until creamy and smooth.

Low FODMAP Options:
White beans are high in GOS. Sub chickpeas and stick with ¼ cup chickpeas per
serving for low FODMAP.
Garlic is high in fructans. Omit and use 1 teaspoon garlic-infused olive oil.
Supercharge It!
Add 2 tablespoons hemp seeds to provide a boost of plant protein and healthy
fats.
Make-Ahead Tips:
This is a great recipe to make on the weekend for easy snacking throughout the
week.
6 PLANT POINTS
Omega-3 Balls
These little balls are packed with plant-based omega-3 fatty acids, hence their
name.
Makes 12 balls
½ cup rolled oats
½ cup hemp hearts, plus for more topping, if desired
7 dates, pitted
½ cup walnuts
3 tablespoons almond butter
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
Place the oats, hemp hearts, dates, walnuts, almond butter, vanilla, and cinnamon
in the base of a food processor and blend until well combined, scraping down the
sides as needed. If the mixture is dry, add 1 tablespoon of water at a time until a
dough forms.
   Pinch off the dough 1 tablespoon at a time and roll into balls. If the dough is
too sticky, add in a little oat flour or place in the fridge to harden.
   Continue with the rest of the dough and enjoy as is, or roll into hemp seeds,
shredded coconut, and/or very finely chopped walnuts for more texture.

Low FODMAP Options:
Dates have moderate fructans. Reduce the number of dates to 4, so that 1 bite
contains ⅓ date. You may need to add 1 to 2 teaspoons maple syrup for
sweetness.
Make-Ahead Tips:
Make these ahead of time and store in the fridge for 2 to 3 weeks or in the
freezer for up to 4 months. Thaw before enjoying.
5 PLANT POINTS
Strawberry Cheesecake Bites
These bites have been a staple in our house for years. They come together fairly
quickly and can be stored in the freezer for whenever you need a quick, yummy
dessert. Nuts are nutrition powerhouses and we are using both almonds and
cashews to create a luscious, dairy-free cheesecake. Because many of the key
ingredients here are high FODMAP, if you are sensitive to GOS or fructans, we
suggest making the Coconut Oat Balls instead.


  Note: If the dates are hard, soak them in warm water for 10 minutes before
using, then drain.
Makes 9 bites
Raw Date Crust
1 cup (about 13) pitted dates (red light, f’tan)
1 cup almonds (red light, GOS)
1 tablespoon unsweetened cocoa powder
Pinch salt
Creamy Strawberry Filling
1 cup raw cashews, soaked in warm water for at least 20 minutes, then drained
   (red light, GOS, f’tan)
1 cup strawberries, chopped
½ cup full-fat canned coconut milk
⅓ cup 100% maple syrup
Juice of 1 large lemon
Make the date crust: Add the dates to the base of a food processor and process
until a thick paste forms. Remove and set aside.
   Add the almonds, cocoa powder, and salt to the same food processor and
process until the nuts are broken down into a fine crumb. Add the date paste
back in and process until combined. It should be sticky enough that you can
pinch the mixture and it will stick together.
   Lightly spray a 12-cup muffin tin with cooking spray, line with muffin liners,
or place a thin strip of parchment paper in the bottom of each muffin cup, with
enough overhang so the cups can easily be pulled out after being frozen. Place
about 1 tablespoon of the crust in the bottom of the muffin tins and press down
to fill. Set aside.
   Make the filling: Clean out the food processor. Add the cashews, strawberries,
coconut milk, maple syrup, and lemon juice to the food processor and puree until
very creamy and smooth, scraping down as needed. Depending on your food
processor, it may take a few minutes until the cashews are creamy and not gritty.
   Evenly pour the filling onto the prepared crust, then place in the freezer for 3
to 4 hours, until hardened. To remove, lightly run a butter knife around the edge
of the cheesecakes or pull with the parchment paper overhang.
   Because these are no-bake and raw, they don’t keep well outside of the
freezer. Enjoy leftovers right from the freezer or let thaw for a few minutes
before enjoying.

Low FODMAP Option:
Dates are high in fructans. One-third of a date is low FODMAP. If you’re
sensitive, make the Turmeric Energy Bites instead!
Almonds are high in GOS. Ten almonds (amount contained in 1 bite) is low
FODMAP.
Cashews are high in GOS and fructans. Ten cashews (amount contained in 1
bite) has high GOS and moderate fructans.
5 PLANT POINTS
Snicker Bites
We designed these date bombs to be a quick snack whenever you need
something sweet, salty, and satisfying. We call these “snicker bites” because
they taste similar to a Snickers bar!
Makes 1 bite
1 date, pitted and halved
1 teaspoon peanut butter
4 to 5 chocolate chips
½ teaspoon sesame seeds
Stuff the date with peanut butter and chocolate chips. Sprinkle with sesame
seeds.

Low FODMAP Options:
Dates are high in fructans. If you’re sensitive, make the Turmeric Energy Bites
instead!
3 PLANT POINTS




To view the 5 scientific references cited in this chapter, please visit me online at
www.theplantfedgut.com/research/.
Acknowledgments


This has been an incredible, unexpected journey that started with just opening
my eyes and my mind to the possibility of things beyond what I was taught in
my medical education. Along that path have been numerous people who
supported, encouraged, edified, and inspired me.
   There are too many of you to mention, but if you’ve been a part of my life
then without a doubt you are one of those people. There are just a few that I’d
like to give special mention because, without you, this book would not have
been possible.
   To my wife, Valarie: I couldn’t have done it without you, babe. As in building
our home and raising our family, you have once again shown me that together
we are so much better than alone. Every time I needed something—whether it
was an editor, words of support and encouragement, talking stuff through, time
to get stuff done, or sage guidance for a tough choice—you were always there
for me. Every single time. I can’t tell you how much that means to me, and it
makes me love you even more.
   To my family, Noreen Johnson, the late Bill Bulsiewicz, Susan and Larry
Kobrovsky: You have always been there for me and helped mold me into who I
am today. I am eternally grateful for your love and support. I am one fortunate
guy to be blessed with such a wonderful family.
   To my editor, Lucia Watson: Every single word and action from you from the
moment we met has been your belief in this project. You went above and beyond
to help me shape my ideas into this book. No matter what happens, I know that
we’ve created something together that’s going to help a lot of people.
   To my agent, Stephanie Tade: Every day I am grateful for that fateful first
meeting and that you decided to take a chance on me. Thank you for believing in
this project from the very beginning and being a champion for it all the way
through to the finish line. You are simply the best.
   To my co-writer, Colleen Martell: I miss our calls, Colleen! Thank you for the
having the patience to hear all my crazy ideas and then helping me work through
them and shape them over iterations into what this is today. I’m damn proud of
our work and can’t wait to see what people think.
   To my recipe developer, Alexandra Caspero: I feel like you’re the secret
weapon in this book. There are a lot of books with recipes, but this is some next-
level stuff. Thank you for being willing to use my ideas and complex requests to
help build the Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks. It’s incredible.
   To my incredible Plant Fed Gut team, Michelle and Ali at Soul Camp;
Jonathan and everyone at Digital Natives; Lalita Ballesteros, my course
developer; Sarah Eustis, my intern: I’d write an entire page to each of you if I
could. I think you guys know how I feel . . . I have the best team supporting me
and this project. I am continuously blown away by how you’ve each gone above
and beyond for me. I appreciate you so much.
   To my publicity and marketing team, Anne and Farin at Avery; Rena and
Natalie at Stanton: Thank you for your tireless efforts. I am sincerely grateful for
everything you’ve done to help me spread this message that I so passionately
believe in.
   Megan Newman and Suzy Swartz at Avery: Thank you for your belief in and
commitment to this project.
   Simon Hill from The Plant Proof Podcast: Thanks for giving me a shot and
always being so supportive. The decision to write this book really came from
meeting you, my friend.
   Robby and Cyrus from Mastering Diabetes: You’re just the best and
constantly went above and beyond for me. Thank you.
   Drs. Nick Shaheen, John Pandolfino, Balfour Sartor, Doug Drossman, and
Peter Kahrilas: Thank you for investing your time into my mentorship. I admire
every one of you. You have shaped me as a physician, as a scientist, and as a
man.
   To all my friends on social media: I wish I could call every single one of you
out by name. You know who you are! I am so grateful for our friendship and
your support of this book and my platform. It’s crazy to get to work alongside
my own personal health heroes. Thank you for inspiring me.
   Last, but certainly not least . . .
   To my children: Daddy loves you! And I will always love you! You are my
greatest gift and my most proud accomplishment.
                         ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ




INDEX


The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link
provided will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to
scroll forward from that location to find the corresponding reference on your e-
reader.
     abdominal distension, 13
     abdominal pain/cramping, 13, 30, 59, 78
     acacia powder supplements, 139
     acid reflux, 30
     adaptation of gut to foods, 101–2
     African Americans, 69
     Africans, 68–69
     Aggregate Nutrient Density Index (ANDI) score, 156
     agriculture, 75
     alcohol, 189, 189–90
     alcoholic cirrhosis, 19
     alcoholic hepatitis, 9, 19, 42
     alcoholic steatohepatitis, 19
     allergic diseases, 14–15, 16, 37, 60
     allergic rhinitis, 13, 14
     allium vegetables, 160–62
     allyl sulfides, 81
     almonds, 220
     Alzheimer’s disease
     and allium vegetables, 162
     and bacterial endotoxins, 9, 42
     and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 23
     and Fiber Fueled program, xvi
     role of lifestyle in, 31
     SCFAs’ impact on, 68
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
and telomere length, xvii
American Gut Project, 73, 74
ANCA-associated vasculitis, 16
androgens (testosterone), 20–21, 42
animal foods
and cancer, 44, 102
digestibility of, 104
and elimination progression, 184
fad diets emphasizing, 45–47
impact on gut microbiome, 43–47
including small amounts of, 183–84
percentage of, in SAD, 38
and saturated fats, 43
and short-chain fatty acids, 102, 104
and weight loss, 46
See also dairy; meat
animal models used in research, 40, 42
animals, exposure to, 198
ankylosing spondylitis, 16
anorexia nervosa, xxvi
anthocyanins, 81, 154
antibacterial soaps, 33
antibiotics, 32, 33, 37, 41, 89, 143–44
antioxidants, 78, 80, 81, 187, 188
antiphospholipid syndrome, 16
anxiety/anxiousness, 13, 23, 30, 164
appetite, 19, 23, 66, 195
apples, 56, 79–80
archaea, 5
aromatics (onions, garlic), 160–62, 185
arthritis, 110
artificial sweeteners, 38, 40–41, 113
arugula
Arugula-Lemon Pesto, 338–39
Arugula-Walnut Pesto, 240
benefits of, 157
asparagus, 81
asthma, 14, 15, 16, 79, 80
astringents, 33
atherosclerosis, 67
atrial fibrillation, 44
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 23, 68
autism, 23
autoimmune diseases
associated with dysbiosis, 14–15, 16
and bacterial endotoxins, 9, 42
and Fiber Fueled program, xvi
and gluten, 85–86
and gut-immune relationship, 14
and hygiene hypothesis, 13
in industrialized vs. agricultural nations, 14–15
as overreaction of immune system, 60
plant-based diets’ impact on, 62–63
prevalence of, 30
and salt, 39
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
and T cells, 61
avocados, 81

Back-Pocket Stir-Fry, 242–43
Bacterial cloud, 198
bacterial endotoxins
and alcohol consumption, 189
butyrate’s reduction of, 60
and healthy fats, 43
and high-fat diets, 42
and inflammation, 9, 19, 60
and intestinal permeability, 59
and legumes, 89
and prebiotic supplements, 138
and saturated fats, 43
SCFAs’ mitigation of, 61, 67
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164, 165
and testosterone declines, 21
bad breath, 13
balance, loss of, 109
Banana Baked Oatmeal, 320–21
bananas, 91
barley, 78, 85, 111, 113
basil, 160
beans, 113. See also legumes
behavior, effect of gut on, 24
Behçet’s disease, 16
belching, 13. See also gas
belly fat, 84
berries, 56, 81, 154–55
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast, 226–27
beta-carotene, 80
beta glucan supplements, 139
beverages. See drinks in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
Biome Broth, 249–50
biorhythms, 193–94
bisphenol A (BPA), 34
black beans, 89
blackberries, 81
black pepper and turmeric, 82
black tea, 56
bloating
caused by constipation, 104
and intestinal permeability (leaky gut), 59
and lactose intolerance, 101, 102
minimizing frequency of, 99
misinformation about, 96
and prebiotic supplements, 138, 139
prevalence of, 30
and probiotic supplements, 144
as symptom of dysbiosis, 13, 112
tracking sources of, 208
blood clots, 81
blood pressure, 65, 81, 88, 91
blood sugar
and biorhythms, 193
and exercise, 197
and fermented foods, 126
fiber’s role in balancing, 51–52
and fruits, 153
impact of gut microbiome on, 17, 18, 19
and legumes, 88
plants that benefit, 78
and prebiotic supplements, 140, 145
SCFAs’ impact on, 65–66
blueberries, 56, 81
blue plants, 81
Blue Zones, 38, 92, 178–79
body mass index, 84
body weight, 65–66, 77
bok choy, 157
bone broth, xvi
bone strenth/health, 89, 102, 126, 133
botulism, 128
bowel habits, altered, 99, 101, 208
brain health and function
and altered mental status, 109
and berries, 154
and brain fog, 13, 67
conditions associated with dysbiosis, 13, 23, 25
impact of gut microbiome on, 22–24
and neurotransmitters, 23
SCFAs’ protective role in, 67–68
and sleep deprivation, 195
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
See also Alzheimer’s disease
breakfast recipes
Banana Baked Oatmeal, 320–21
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast, 226–27
Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie, 287–88
Creamy Chai Oats, 321–22
Creamy Coconut Pudding with Pineapple, 224–25
Crispy Oat Granola, 228–29
Gluten-Free Pancakes, 262–63
Pumpkin Pie for Breakfast Smoothie, 260–61
Puttanesca Tofu Scramble, 286–87
Simple Overnight Oats, 261–62
Spicy Breakfast Tacos, 288–89
Superfood Smoothie, with Bowl Option, 225–26
Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge, 223–24
Tofu Scramble Bowls, 259–60
breast cancer
and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 18, 20, 22
and fungi, 167–68
and high-fiber diet, 64
and organic food choices, 35
and soy, 89
type 2 diabetes’ link to, 18
breast milk, 56
broccoli/broccoli sprouts, 81, 165–66, 166
brown plants, 81
Brussels sprouts, 81
buckwheat, 91
Buettner, Dan, 38
Buffalo Chickpea Salad, 301–2
Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili, 266–67
butyrate
and cancer, 63–64
and congestive heart failure, 67
and Crohn’s disease, 61
neuro-protective powers of, 68
role of, 58–59
and Standard American Diet, 69
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165

cabbage, 81, 129–30
caffeine, 187
calcium, absorption of, 138
calorie counting, 77, 190–91
cancer
and alcohol consumption, 189
and allium vegetables, 161
and animal proteins, 44, 102
and anticarcinogenic plants, 78
and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 20, 22
and fermented foods, 126, 128–29, 132, 133
and Fiber Fueled program, xvi
and fruits, 79, 80, 154
and greens, 157
increases in rates of, 33
and lectins, 91
and legumes, 91
and phytochemicals, 79, 80, 80, 81
and processed foods, 42
role of lifestyle in, 31
SCFAs’ protective role against, 63–65
and soy, 89
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
type 2 diabetes’ link to, 18
as underreaction of immune system, 60
and whole grains, 83, 91
Candida albicans, 161
carbohydrates
apprehensions about, 51–52
complex, 51
impaired metabolism of, 86–87, 104
microbiota’s role in metabolizing, 103
refined, 39, 51–52, 84, 85
See also FODMAPs; whole grains
cardiovascular disease. See heart disease
Carnivore diet, 46
carrots, 80
Caspero, Alexandra, 202, 204
catechins, 79
cauliflower, 81
celiac disease, 16, 26–27, 30, 85, 87, 106–8, 109
chemotherapy, 165
chia seeds, 159, 185
chickpeas, 89
Buffalo Chickpea Salad, 301–2
Chickpea and Avocado Sandwich, 334–35
Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites, 279
Chickpea Meatballs, 329–30
children, cognitive performance of, 68
Chili Mac, 327–28
chives, 81
chlorophyll, 81
chocolate
Chocolate Banana Nice Cream, 312
Chocolate Mousse, 278
Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie, 287–88
cravings for, 24
cholesterol
and fermented foods, 126, 132
and fiber consumption, 65
and legumes, 88, 91
and phytochemicals, 81
plants that address, 78
and prebiotic supplements, 138
and SCFAs’ impact on, 66
and seaweed, 167
and soy, 89
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
and whole grains, 91
CHOP and STOP in preparing foods, 161, 161, 162, 163, 185
chronic fatigue syndrome, 16, 23
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 31, 79
circadian rhythms, 193–94, 196
cirrhosis, 189
Citrus and Mint Salad, 265–66
cleaning products, 33
Clostridiodes difficile (C. diff), 9–11, 16, 37, 40–41, 143
Clostridium scindens, 20
cocoa, 56
Coconut Oat Balls, 250–51
coffee, 140, 185–86, 187, 194
cognition. See brain health and function
colitis, 9–10, 37, 39
collards
benefits of, 81, 156–57
Colorful Collard Wraps, 289–90
colon health, 57, 58–59, 60, 88, 120–21
colonocytes, 58
colorants in foods, 39
colorectal cancer
and greens, 157
and high-fiber diet, 64–65
and legumes, 88
and prebiotic supplements, 140
role of gut microbiota in, 18
and soy, 89
and Western diet, 69
and whole grains, 83
Colorful Collard Wraps, 289–90
colors of fruits and vegetables, 80, 80–81
concentration, difficulty with, 13
congestive heart failure, 9, 42, 44, 67
connection, human, 198
constipation
addressing first, 104–5
and intestinal permeability (leaky gut), 59
and Parkinson’s disease, 68
and prebiotic supplements, 140
prevalence of, 30
and probiotic supplements, 147
as symptom of dysbiosis, 13
corn/maize, 75
coronary artery disease
and apples, 79
and bacterial endotoxins, 9, 42
and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 19
and exercise, 197
reversal of, with plant-based diet, 45
and SCFAs’ protective mechanisms, 66–67
and whole grains, 83
Costa Rica, 91–92
cravings, 24, 39, 175–77, 201
C-reactive protein, 84, 88, 138
Creamy Chai Oats, 321–22
Creamy Coconut Pudding with Pineapple, 224–25
Crick, Francis, 25
Crispy Baked Tofu, 294
Crispy Oat Granola, 228–29
Crohn’s disease, 14, 16, 30, 37, 46, 61–62
cruciferous vegetables, 162–66, 185
curcumin, 82
Curry Tofu Bok Choy, 243–45
cyclophosphamide, 8

Daily Salad, 229–30
dairy
and Blue Zone diets, 38
and bone health, 102
elimination of, 183
fermented, 134
including small amounts of, 183–84
and lactose intolerance, 101–2, 102, 112–13
in Standard American Diet, 39
David, Lawrence, 46, 125
Davies, Julian, 25–26
death
early, 42, 102
lifestyle related causes of, 31, 58
Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, 121–22
depression, 23, 30, 164, 195
dermatitis herpetiformis, 16
desserts in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 209, 214, 220
Chickpea Cookie Dough Bites, 279
Chocolate Banana Nice Cream, 312
Chocolate Mousse, 278
Mushroom Hot Cocoa, 312–13
Snicker Bites, 345
Strawberry Cheesecake Bites, 343–45
Whipped Coconut Cream, 252–53
Zesty Lemon Chia Pudding, 251–53
diabetes
fiber’s ability to prevent, 52
and fruits, 153
and legumes, 88
and prebiotic supplements, 138
role of gut microbiota in, 19
role of lifestyle in, 31
and saturated fats, 43
and SCFAs’ protective mechanisms, 65–66
and sleep deprivation, 195
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
type 1 diabetes, 14, 17, 30
and whole grains, 83, 84
See also type 2 diabetes
diarrhea
constipation presenting as, 105
and FODMAPs, 112
and intestinal permeability (leaky gut), 59
and lactose intolerance, 102
and prebiotic supplements, 140
prevalence of, 30
as symptom of dysbiosis, 13
digestive enzymes of gut microbiota, 54
digestive symptoms
and lactose intolerance, 101
minimizing frequency of, 99
misinformation about, 96
and prebiotic supplements, 138, 139
as symptoms of dysbiosis, 112
tracking sources of, 208
See also specific symptoms, including bloating and gas
digestive system, passage of fiber through, 51, 53–54
dinner recipes
Arugula-Lemon Pesto, 338–39
Arugula-Walnut Pesto, 240
Back-Pocket Stir-Fry, 242–43
Buffalo Chickpea Salad, 301–2
Chickpea and Avocado Sandwich, 334–35
Chickpea Meatballs, 329–30
Chili Mac, 327–28
Curry Tofu Bok Choy, 243–45
Easy Cheese Sauce, 327
4-Bean Chili, 326–28
Gumbo, 303–5
Jicama Fries, 333–34
Kimchi Fried Rice, 305–6
Lentil Bolognese with Spaghetti Squash, 299–300
Lentil Masala, 307–9
Lentil Sloppy Joes, 332–33
Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew, 274–75
Lentil Walnut Tacos, 269–70
Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl, 271–72
Mushroom Risotto, 245–47
Nourishing Tomato Noodle Soup, 238–39
Pepita Parmesan, 301
Pesto Pasta, 239–40
Plant-Powered Polenta Ragu, 235–36
Quick Garlic Broccoli, 331–32
Roasted Italian Medley, 241–42
Saag Tofu, 272–74
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes, 269–70
Sunday Pasta, 337–39
Tempeh Tacos and Taco Salad, 236–38
Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu, 297–99
Tuscan Kale Soup, 335–37
disease risk, environmental factors in, 25
diversity of microbiome composition
central importance of, 6–7, 9
and Crohn’s disease, 61
decreases in, 19, 39, 61, 69
and diversity of foods consumed, 7, 74–75
and healthy fats, 43
prebiotics’ effects on, 57
diversity of plants in diet, 73–93
and agricultural practices, 75
and antibiotic use, 144
benefits of maximizing, 76
central importance of, 92–93
decline in, 75
and diversity of microbiome composition, 74–75
and “eating the rainbow,” 80, 80–81, 82
and elimination of foods, 96
in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 209–11, 210
and Golden Rule of eating, 76–77, 181
and Hadza of Tanzania, 68–69, 100–101
and lectins, 90–91
and legumes, 87–92
and phytochemicals, 79–83
as predictor of healthy microbiome, 74, 91, 181
and SCFA-producing bacteria, 74–75
synergistic effects of plant pairs, 81–82
and training a sensitive gut, 99–101, 115
and unique gut-healing powers, 78
and whole grains, 83–87
doctors and nutrition counseling, xix
dopamine, 22–23
Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad, 233–35
drinks in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 209, 214
The Green Drink, 309
Lemon-Ginger Tea, 247
Matcha Latte, 275–76
Mushroom Hot Cocoa, 312–13
Turmeric Latte, 340–41
Drossman, Douglas, 23
drugs, 8, 30–31, 32, 34, 37
Dweck, Carol, 174
dysbiosis (damage to gut microbiota)
about, 9
and alcohol consumption, 189
causes of, 103
conditions associated with, 16, 19, 20, 22, 25, 42, 58
correction of, 43, 57, 60
and digestive enzymes, 103
and food sensitivity, 95–96
and healthy fats, 43
and high-fat diets, 42
and inflammation, 9, 19, 60
and intestinal permeability, 9, 21, 42, 59
from jet lag, 193
and plant-diversity training for gut, 114–15
and prebiotic supplements, 140, 141
as root of modern disease, 60
and saturated fats, 43
and SCFAs’ ability to restore balance, 57, 61
and six of top ten causes of death, 58
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
symptoms associated with, 13, 112, 137
See also food sensitivity

Easy Cheese Sauce, 327
eating disorders, xxvi, 199
“eating the rainbow,” 80, 80–81, 82
eating without restrictions, 77, 156, 190–91
E. coli, 9, 57, 61–62, 127, 161
eczema, 13, 14, 16
edamame, 89, 310
elimination of foods, 96–97, 99, 102, 105–6, 113–14
endocrine system, 17–18, 20–21, 22
endometrial cancer, 18, 18, 20, 22
endometrial hyperplasia, 20, 22
endometriosis, 20, 22
energy, 19, 58, 197
eosinophilic esophagitis, 16
epigenetics, 26–27
equol, 89
erectile dysfunction, 22
esophageal cancer, 64
estrogen, 20
ethnic foods, xxiv, 178
exercise, importance of, 197–98
eye health, 80, 81

fad diets, 45–47
fasting, 11
fat burning/reduction, 138, 197
fat cells, 66
fatigue, 13, 187
fats, 24, 36, 42–43
fava beans, 91
fecal transplants, 10–11, 12, 16–17, 149
fermented foods, 117–36
benefits of, 124–27, 132, 147
and cancer, 126, 128–29, 132, 133
common concerns about, 127–29
daily consumption of, 118, 136, 152
and dairy, 134
and F GOALS, 152
guidelines for making, 130–31
history of, 122–24
introduction to, 118–19
kimchi, 132
kombucha, 135–36, 189
and lectins, 127
mechanisms underlying, 119–20
miso, 132–33
natto, 125
probiotic supplements vs., 142–43
safety of, 127–28
sauerkraut, 118–19, 120, 129–30, 130–31
sourdough bread, 126, 135
tempeh, 133–34
F GOALS, 152, 168, 169, 183, 184–85
Fruit & Fermented, 152–55
Greens & Grains, 155–57
Omega-3 super seeds, 158–60
Aromatics (onions, garlic), 160–62
Legumes, 162
Shrooms & Seaweed, 166–68
Sulforaphane (in cruciferous vegetables), 162–66
Fiber Fueled 365 Lifestyle, 173–99, 211
Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks
and FF365 Lifestyle, 211
flexibility built into, 209
food list for, 212–13
keeping a journal during, 207
kitchenware needed for, 212, 213–14
meal-prep day for, 214
overview of, 205
philosophy behind, 204–5
Quick Fix recipes for, 209, 215
returning to recipes in, 209, 214
Week 1, 215–53
Week 2, 253–79
Week 3, 280–313
Week 4, 314–45
fiber supplements, 49
fibromyalgia, 16
flavonoids, 81
flaxseeds, 78, 158–59, 185
Fleming, Sir Alexander, 33
FODMAPs, 112–15
fermentation’s reduction of, 127
on F GOALS list, 169
in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 182–83, 205, 208–9
pre- and probiotics’ help with, 137
food addiction, 51
food additives, 33, 39–40
food allergies, 13, 16, 105–6
food sensitivity, 95–115
and adaptation of gut to foods, 101–2
conditions associated with, 95–96
and constipation, 104–5
and damage/dysbiosis in gut, 13, 95–96, 103, 112, 114–15, 141
and digestive symptoms, 96, 99
and fallacy of elimination strategy, 96–97, 99, 102
and FODMAPs, 112–15, 182–83
food allergy vs., 105–6
and fructans, 101, 110–11, 112
and gluten, 106–11, 111
identifying, during Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 208–9
and low-gluten diets, 87
and plant-diversity training for gut, 99–100, 115, 182–83
prevalence of, xvi
and threshold of tolerance, 101–2
See also irritable bowel syndrome
4-Bean Chili, 326–28
fructans, 101, 110–11, 112, 113
fructose, 113
fruits
anti-inflammatory properties of, 103
benefits of, 153–55
and Blue Zone diets, 38
and F GOALS, 153–55
in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 220
and fructose, 113
juices, 153, 188
misguided fears about, 153
and polyols, 113
and weight loss, 153, 154
Fuhrman, Joel, 156
fungi, 4–5, 6. See also mushrooms
fungicides, 33

GABA (γaminobutyric acid), 22
garbanzo beans. See chickpeas
gardening, 196
garlic, 81, 160–62
gas
caused by constipation, 104
and inulin, 140
and lactose intolerance, 101, 102
minimizing frequency of, 99
misinformation about, 96
plants that address, 78
and prebiotic supplements, 138, 139
prevalence of, 30
as symptom of dysbiosis, 13, 112
tracking sources of, 208
genetically modified organisms (GMOs), 34, 35
genetics and epigenetics, 8, 9, 25–27, 86–87
germ theory, 32–33, 119
ghrelin, 19
GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1), 19
gluten, xvi, 85–87, 106–11, 111, 205
Gluten-Free Pancakes, 262–63
glycoside hydrolases, 53
glyphosate, 34–35, 35
Golden Rule of eating
central importance of, 76–77, 145, 181
and elimination of foods, 96
with prebiotics, 141, 146
See also diversity of plants in diet
gout, 19
grams of fiber, counting, 52–53, 74
grapes, 81
GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe), 33, 40
Green Drink, 309
green/green-white plants, 81
green peas, 88
greens, 155–57, 185
green tea, 56, 188
growth mindset, 174
guaiacol, 21
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 16
Gumbo, 303–5

habits, healthy, 180–81
Hadza of Tanzania, 68–69, 100–101, 112
hara hachi bu, 192
health, five axes of, 8, 9
health care in America, xviii–xix, 37
health mindset, 174–78
Health Professionals Follow-Up Study, 83
heartburn, 13
heart disease
and allium vegetables, 162
and animal proteins, 44, 102
and apples, 80
and Fiber Fueled program, xvi–xvii
increase in rates of, 33
and legumes, 88, 91
and phytochemicals, 81
role of lifestyle in, 31
and saturated fats, 43
and SCFAs’ protective mechanisms, 65, 66–67
and sleep deprivation, 195
and soy, 89
and whole grains, 83, 85, 87, 91
heavy metal toxicity, 68
hemp seeds, 159–60, 185
hepatitis, autoimmune, 16
herbicides, 33, 34
herbs and spices, 160, 211, 213
high-fructose corn syrup, 51, 113
Hippocrates, 173
honey, 113
hormonal balance/imbalance, xv, 8, 9, 20–21, 30. See also endocrine system
hormones, livestock treated with, 33
Human Genome Project, 25
human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), 56
hunger, constant, 51
hydration, 185–86
hygiene hypothesis, 13, 196
hyperlipidemia, 19
hypertension, 39
hypothyroid, 22

ibuprofen, 32, 37
immune system
and exercise, 197
and fermented foods, 126
and phytochemicals, 80
resident in the gut, 13–14
SCFAs’ role in, 60–63
and sleep deprivation, 195
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
and T cells, 61
and whole grains, 84
indigestion, 13
indoles, 81
industrial animal agriculture, 127
infections, 60, 164
infectious diseases, 32–33, 83
infertility, 22
inflammation
and animal proteins, 44
and artificial sweeteners, 40
digestive distress mistaken for, 104
dysbiosis’s promotion of, 9, 19, 60
fermented foods’ reduction of, 124, 132
and gluten, 85–86
of the gut, 84 (see also inflammatory bowel disease)
and high-fat diets, 42
of intestinal lining, 59
and intestinal permeability (leaky gut), 9, 59
and legumes, 88, 91
and NSAIDs usage, 32
as outcome of consuming unhealthy foods, 7–8
plants that address, 78
and saturated fats, 43
SCFAs’ ability to suppress, 60–63
and Standard American Diet, 39
and turmeric–black pepper combo, 82
and whole grains, 84, 91
inflammatory bacteria, 39, 46, 57, 84, 102, 104
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 37, 45, 46, 62, 143. See also Crohn’s disease
insecticides, 33
insoluble fiber, 53, 56
Instagram, xxvi
insulin, 17–18
insulin resistance, 18, 20, 36, 40, 91
insulin sensitivity, 19, 124, 132, 145, 165, 167, 193
intermittent fasting, 193
interstitial cystitis, 16
intestinal barrier function, 42
intestinal lining
gut microbiota’s consumption of, 58
inflammation of, 59
NSAIDs’ effects on, 37
sulforaphane’s ability to repair, 165
intestinal permeability (leaky gut)
about, 59
and alcohol consumption, 189
and animal proteins, 44
causes of, 9, 59
correction of, 44, 59–63
dysbiosis underlying, 9, 21
and gluten, 85–86
inflammation resulting from, 9, 59
and male reproductive hormones, 21
and plant proteins, 44
and release of bacterial endotoxin, 9, 43, 59
and saturated fats, 43
and stress, 199
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
and whole grains, 86
inulin, 140
iron, 82
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
and altered gut function/motility, 23, 59
butyrate’s beneficial effects on, 59
and coffee, 187
and food sensitivity, 95
and Paleo diet, 45
and prebiotic supplements, 138
prevalence of, 30, 95
and probiotic supplements, 143
and sourdough bread, 127
and visceral hypersensitivity, 23, 59
isoflavones, 88–89, 126
isomalto-oligosaccharide (IMO), 140
isothiocyanates, 81

jackfruit, 91
Jicama Fries, 333–34
joint pain, 13, 109
juices, 153, 188

kale, 81, 82, 92, 155, 156
karma, nutritional, 58
Kawasaki disease, 16
kefir, 134
kelp/kombu, 168
Keto diet, 46
ketogenic diet, xiv
kidney disease, 19, 31, 44
kimchi
benefits of, 132
Kimchi Fried Rice, 305–6
kissing, 21
Knight, Rob, 73, 74
kombucha, 135–36, 189

lactose and lactase enzyme, 101–2, 102, 112–13, 144
L-carnitine, 44
leaky gut. See intestinal permeability
lectins, 90–91, 127
legumes
anti-inflammatory properties of, 103
benefits of, 81, 87–92
and blood pressure, 88, 91
and Blue Zone diets, 38
and cancer, 91
and cardiovascular disease, 91
and cholesterol, 88, 91
in F GOALS, 162
and inflammation, 88, 91
and insulin resistance, 91
and lentil effect, 65–66
and life expectancy, 91
and resistant starch, 56
and short-chain fatty acids, 89–90, 91
and weight loss, 88, 91
and whole grains, 91–92
Lemon-Ginger Tea, 247
lemons, 81, 82
lentils
fiber in, 88
Lentil Bolognese with Spaghetti Squash, 299–300
lentil effect, 65–66
Lentil Masala, 307–9
Lentil Sloppy Joes, 332–33
Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew, 274–75
Lentil Walnut Tacos, 269–70
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes, 269–70
leptin, 19
life expectancies, xviii, 30, 31, 33, 47, 91
Lifestyle Heart Trial (Ornish), 45
limonoids, 81
liver injury, 40, 79
livestock, antibiotics/hormones given to, 33
Loma Linda, California, 38
longevity, 90
low-fiber diets, 58
lunch, size of, 194
lunch recipes
Butternut Squash and Quinoa Chili, 266–67
Citrus and Mint Salad, 265–66
Colorful Collard Wraps, 289–90
Crispy Baked Tofu, 294
Daily Salad, 229–30
Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad, 233–35
Mediterranean Grain Salad, 291–92
Muhammara Sandwich, 233
Nothing Fishy Sushi Wraps, 324–26
No-Tuna Sunflower Salad, 267–69
Nourishing Buddha Bowl, 295–96
Oil-Free Orange Dressing, 230
Quick-Pickled Beets, 230–31
Red Lentil Curry Soup, 263–65
Roasted Vegetables, 296–97
Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl, 292–94
Supercharged Miso Soup, 322–23
Supercharged Roasted Roots, 231–32
Wild Biome Super Soup, 232–33
lupus, 16
lutein, 81, 156
lycopene, 80, 81
magnesium, absorption of, 138
mannitol, 113
Matcha Latte, 275–76
meal size, 194
meat
added to recipes, 203
and Blue Zone diets, 38–39
and changes in cravings, 176–77
digestibility of, 104
grass-fed, xvi, 184
impact on gut microbiome, 43–47
including small amounts of, 183–84
in Standard American Diet, 39
medicine, food as, 167, 173
meditation, 199
Mediterranean Grain Salad, 291–92
memory function, 81
menopausal symptoms, 89
metabolic conditions associated with dysbiosis, 16–19, 19
metabolic syndrome, 18
metabolism, 8, 9, 19
microbial enzymes, 125
microbiome (term), 4
microbiota of the gut
damage to (see dysbiosis)
digestive enzymes of, 54
digestive function, 7
and five axes of human health, 8
and immune system, 13–14
impact of food choices on, 7
and individual responses to food, 19
number of organisms comprising, 5–6
predictor for health of (see diversity of microbiome composition)
scientific research on, 3–4
as “second brain,” 22
specialization in, 8–9
time required to adapt to changes, 206
types of organisms comprising, 4–5
unique to individuals, 7, 98
microscopic colitis, 16
migraine headaches, 23
mindful eating, engaging in, 191–93
mindset, health, 174–78, 211
miso, 132–33
Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl, 271–72
organic, non-GMO, 89
Supercharged Miso Soup, 322–23
mixed fruit bowls, 81
monounsaturated fats (MUFA), 43
Monsanto, 34
mood imbalance, 13, 23, 164
mucus in stool, 13
Muhammara Dip, 248–49
Muhammara Sandwich, 233
multiple sclerosis, 14, 16, 30, 164
muscle aches, 13, 109
muscle control, loss of, 109
mushrooms
benefits of, 167
importance of cooking, 167, 185
and lectins, 91
Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl, 271–72
Mushroom Hot Cocoa, 312–13
Mushroom Risotto, 245–47
myths about fiber, 52–54

naproxen, 32, 37
nature, connecting with, 196–97
nausea, 13
navy beans, 89
neuropsychiatric conditions associated with dysbiosis, 22–24, 24
neurotransmitters, 22–23
90% plant-based diet as goal, 178–80, 191
nonalcoholic fatty liver, 9, 19, 42
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 34–35
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 32, 37
norepinephrine, 22
nori, 168
Nothing Fishy Sushi Wraps, 324–26
No-Tuna Sunflower Salad, 267–68
Nourishing Buddha Bowl, 295–96
Nourishing Tomato Noodle Soup, 238–39
numbness in legs or arms, 109, 110
Nurses’ Health Study, 83
nutrient density, 155–56, 160
nutritional deficiencies concerns, 77
nuts, 38

oats, 56, 78
obesity
and antibiotic-resistant microbes, 37
and bacterial endotoxins, 9, 42
and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 19, 19
as new normal, 32
and Paleo diet, 45
and saturated fats, 43
and SCFAs’ protective mechanisms, 66
and sleep deprivation, 195
and Standard American Diet, 39
and whole grains, 85
odor profiles, 21
Oil-Free Orange Dressing, 230
oils, 179
olive oil, 43, 179
vegetable oil, 43
oleic acid, 43
omega-3s
benefits of, 43, 56
Omega-3 Balls, 342–43
sources of, 158–60
supplements, 195
omega-6s, 158
onions, 81, 160–62
oral contraceptives, 37
orange-colored plants, 80
oranges, 81
organic foods, 35, 35, 168
Ornish, Dean, 45
orthorexia, xxvi
osteoarthritis, 9, 42
osteoporosis, 37, 126
outdoors, time in, 196–97
ovarian cancer, 89
overweight, prevalence of, 30

pairs of plants, synergistic effects of, 81–82
Paleo diet, xiii–xiv, 45–46, 84
pancreatitis, 19
parasites, 5
Parkinson’s disease, xvii, 23, 68, 102, 154, 164
partially hydrolyzed guar gum, 139
Pasteur, Louis, 32, 119
peaches, 81
pea protein, 90
Pepita Parmesan, 301
peptide YY, 19
peripheral artery disease, 44
pesticides, 127
pesto recipes
Arugula-Lemon Pesto, 338–39
Arugula-Walnut Pesto, 240
Pesto Pasta, 239–40
pharmaceutical industry, 31–32, 33–34
pheromones, 21
phytochemicals/phytonutrients, 79–83
in allium vegetables, 161
CHOP and STOP in preparing, 185
and fermented foods, 126
in fruits, 154
in greens, 156, 157
in herbs, 160
plants as source of, xxiv
polyphenols, xxiv, 56, 126, 187, 188, 189–90
phytoestrogens, 88–89
pinto beans, 88
plant-based diets
and Blue Zone diets, 38
and 90% plant-based diet as goal, 178–80
and nutritional deficiencies concerns, 77
Plant Points, 209–11, 210, 211
Plant-Powered Polenta Ragu, 235–36
Plant-Powered Trail Mix, 277
plastics, 34
plums, 81
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), 20, 22
polyphenols, xxiv, 56, 126, 187, 188, 189–90
polyunsaturated fats, 158
pomegranates, 56
portion sizes, eating without restricting, 77, 156, 190–91
postbiotics
about, 7, 55
and polyphenols and omega-3’s, 56
See also short-chain fatty acids
potatoes, 56, 78
prebiotics
about, 55
allium vegetables, 161
benefits of, 57
and fermented foods, 126
in green tea, 188
importance of, 74
prioritization of, 145
sources of, 56, 56
supplements, 137, 138–41, 145–46, 195
and whole grains, 83
prescription drug use, 8, 30–31, 32, 37
preservation of foods, 122–24. See also fermented foods
preservatives in foods (chemical), 33, 39
primary biliary cholangitis, 16
primary sclerosing cholangitis, 16
probiotics (healthy bacteria)
about, 7, 55, 141
in apples, 79–80
building momentum in, 57–58
impact of, 7
prioritization of, 145
science on, 143
supplements, 137, 141–49, 143–44, 145–46, 195
processed foods, 38, 39, 41–42, 52, 111, 123–24
prostate cancer, 22, 80, 89, 161
proteins
America’s obsession with, 43–44, 50
animal proteins, 43–45, 102
plant proteins, 44, 90, 91–92
proton pump inhibitor prescriptions, 32, 37
psoriasis, 16, 109
psoriatic arthritis, 16
psyllium supplements, 139
pumpkins
benefits of, 80
Pumpkin Hummus, 276–77
Pumpkin Pie for Breakfast Smoothie, 260–61
purple plants, 81
Puttanesca Tofu Scramble, 286–87

quercetin, 79
Quick Fix recipes, 209, 215
Quick Garlic Broccoli, 331–32
Quick-Pickled Beets, 230–31

rashes, 109, 110
raw vs. cooked foods, 182
recommended daily intake of fiber, 50
Red Lentil Curry Soup, 263–65
red plants, 80
red wine, 189–90
refined carbohydrates, 39, 51–52, 84, 85
reflux, 13
resistant starches, 56, 74, 78, 162, 190–91
respiratory diseases, 83
restless leg syndrome, 16
restrictive diets, xxiv, 45–47, 77, 82
resveratrol, 81, 189–90
Reynolds, Andrew, 64, 65
rheumatoid arthritis, 16, 30, 62–63, 164
rice, 56, 75
Roasted Italian Medley, 241–42
Roasted Vegetables, 296–97
romaine, 157
rye, 85, 111, 113
rye bread, 135

Saag Tofu, 272–74
SAD (Standard American Diet), 37–47, 41–42, 178
salads
Buffalo Chickpea Salad, 301–2
Citrus and Mint Salad, 265–66
Daily Salad, 229–30
Down ’n’ Dirty Kale Salad, 233–35
Mediterranean Grain Salad, 291–92
No-Tuna Sunflower Salad, 267–68
Tempeh Tacos and Taco Salad, 236–38
Salmonella, 9, 57, 127
salt, 36, 39, 129, 214
sanitation, 33
sarcoidosis, 16
Sartor, Balfour, 78
satiety hormones, 51, 66, 138, 145–46, 190–91
saturated fats, 43, 46
sauerkraut, 118–19, 120, 129–30, 130–31
scleroderma, 16
seasonal allergies, 16
seaweed, 78, 167–68
second meal effect, 65–66
seeds, omega-3, 158–60, 185
sensitive gut, 95–115
serotonin, 22–23
Sesame Noodle Meal Prep Bowl, 292–94
Seventh-day Adventists, 38
sexual attraction, 21
sexual dysfunction, 22
Shaheen, Nick, xxiii
sharing the message about gut healing, 96–97
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
about, 54–55
and animal proteins, 102
benefits of, 56, 57, 58–59
building momentum in production of, 57–58
and cancer prevention, 63–65
central importance of, 60
and cognition/brain function, 67–68
and correcting leaky gut, 59–60
and diabetes prevention, 65–66
and diversity of plants consumed, 74–75
and exercise, 197
and gluten-restricted diets, 86
and heart disease prevention, 65, 66–67
and legumes, 89–90, 91
and Paleo diet, 84
and pH of the colon, 120–21
and prebiotic supplements, 138, 140
role of, in immune system, 60–63
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
and white potatoes, 78
and whole grains, 84, 91
See also butyrate
shortness of breath, 13
Simple Overnight Oats, 261–62
sinus congestion, 13
Sjögren’s syndrome, 16
skin health, 13, 80, 157
sleep, 23, 195–96
smoothies
Chocolate Peanut Butter Super Smoothie, 287–88
preferred over juices, 188
Pumpkin Pie for Breakfast Smoothie, 260–61
Superfood Smoothie, 225–26
snacks in Fiber Fueled 4 Weeks, 209, 214
Biome Broth, 249–50
Coconut Oat Balls, 250–51
Muhammara Dip, 248–49
Omega-3 Balls, 342–43
Plant-Powered Trail Mix, 277
Pumpkin Hummus, 276–77
Snicker Bites, 345
Speedy Edamame, 310
Turmeric Energy Bites, 310–11
White Bean Hummus, 341–42
Snicker Bites, 345
social media, 198
soil health, 120, 122
soluble fiber, 53, 56, 65, 139–40
Sonnenburg, Justin, 68, 69
sorbitol, 113
soups
Biome Broth, 249–50
Nourishing Tomato Noodle Soup, 238–39
Red Lentil Curry Soup, 264–65
Supercharged Miso Soup, 322–23
Tuscan Kale Soup, 335–37
Wild Biome Super Soup, 232–33
source of fiber, importance of, 52
sourdough bread, 126, 135
soy
benefits of, 88–89
choosing organic, non-GMO, 89
miso, 132–33
Miso, Mushroom, and Soba Bowl, 271–72
soybeans, 91, 125
soy milk, 89, 126
Speedy Edamame, 310
Supercharged Miso Soup, 322–23
Tempeh Tacos and Taco Salad, 236–38
See also tofu
spices and herbs, 160, 211, 213
Spicy Breakfast Tacos, 288–89
spinach, 81, 157
spirulina, 168
Stewart, William, 33
stomach cancer, 81
stool, 10–11, 12, 16–17, 149
Strachan, David, 13
Strawberry Cheesecake Bites, 343–45
stress, 187, 199
strokes
and apples, 79
and Fiber Fueled program, xvi
role of lifestyle in, 31
and SCFAs’ protective mechanisms, 65
and sleep deprivation, 195
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
and whole grains, 83
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes, 269–70
sugars, 24, 36, 39, 51, 113
sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 162–66
Sunday Pasta, 337–39
Supercharged Miso Soup, 322–23
Supercharged Roasted Roots, 231–32
superfoods, 151
Superfood Smoothie, with Bowl Option, 225–26
Super Seedy Breakfast Porridge, 223–24
supplements, xiv–xv, 195
sweet potatoes
benefits of, 80
Berry Good Sweet Potato Toast, 226–27
Lentil–Sweet Potato Stew, 274–75
Stuffed Taco Sweet Potatoes, 269–70

Talalay, Paul, 163
tamari, 89
taste buds, 175–77
T cells, 39, 61
teas, 56
technologies, advances in, 34
telomeres, xvii
tempeh, 133–34
organic, non-GMO, 89
Tempeh Tacos and Taco Salad, 236–38
testosterone (androgens), 20–21, 42
Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu, 297–99
thyroid health, plants that benefit, 78
time-restricted eating (TRE), 193–94
TMAO (trimethylamine N-oxide), 8, 44–46, 67, 69, 84, 104, 190
tofu, 89
Crispy Baked Tofu, 294
Curry Tofu Bok Choy, 243–45
Puttanesca Tofu Scramble, 286–87
Saag Tofu, 272–74
Thai Rainbow Bowls with Peanut Tofu, 297–99
Tofu Scramble Bowls, 259–60
tomatoes, 80, 81
Toxoplasma gondii, 5
trans fats, 43
traumatic brain injury, 68
trehalose, 41
triglycerides, 138, 197
turmeric
and black pepper, 82
Turmeric Energy Bites, 310–11
Turmeric Latte, 340–41
Turnbaugh, Peter, 46, 125
Tuscan Kale Soup, 335–37
type 1 diabetes, 14, 17, 30
type 2 diabetes
and apples, 79, 80
and bacterial endotoxins, 9, 42
cancer’s link to, 18
and dysbiosis in gut microbiota, 19
and fiber consumption, 65
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 165
and whole grains, 85
types of fiber
insoluble fiber, 53, 56
soluble fiber, 53, 56, 65, 139–40

ulcerative colitis, 15, 16, 30, 37, 44

vaccines, 33
vagus nerve, 22
vegetable oil, 43
vegetables
anti-inflammatory properties of, 103
and Blue Zone diets, 38
See also specific vegetables
Verdú, Elena, 27
vinegar, 124
viruses, 5
vitamin B12, 195
vitamin D, 195

wakame, 168
walking, 197–98
walnuts, 56
water consumption, 185–87
watermelon, 80
Watson, James, 25
weakness, 13
Week 1, 215–53
drinks, snacks, and desserts, 219–20
meal prep, 219
menu, 220–22
Quick-Fix recipes, 220
recipes, 222–53
shopping list, 215–19
Week 2, 253–79
drinks, snacks, and desserts, 255
meal prep, 256
menu, 256–58
Quick-Fix recipes, 256
recipes, 259–79
shopping list, 253–55
Week 3, 280–313
drinks, snacks, and desserts, 282–83
meal prep, 283
menu, 284–85
Quick-Fix recipes, 283
recipes, 286–313
shopping list, 280–82
Week 4, 314–45
drinks, snacks, and desserts, 316
meal prep, 317
menu, 317–19
Quick-Fix recipes, 317
recipes, 320–45
shopping list, 314–16
weight gain, 13, 19, 20, 30, 51, 195
weight loss
after author’s weight gain, xxii, xxiv–xxv
conventional perspectives on, 19
and exercise, 197
and fad diets, 45–47
and fermented foods, 124, 132
fiber’s promotion of, xv, 52
and fruits, 153, 154
and legumes, 88, 91
and seaweed, 167
and sulforaphane in cruciferous vegetables, 164
and whole grains, 91
wheat
and agricultural practices, 75
and fructans, 113
and gluten, 85, 111
and lectins, 91
wheat allergy, 108
wheat bran, 78
wheat dextrin supplements, 139–40
whole wheat, 86, 135
wheezing, 13
Whipped Coconut Cream, 252–53
White Bean Hummus, 341–42
white-green plants, 81
Whole 30 diet, xiv
whole foods, 38, 52
whole grains
anti-inflammatory properties of, 84, 85, 103
benefits of, 81, 83–85, 155
and blood pressure, 91
and Blue Zone diets, 38
and cancer, 83, 91
and cardiovascular disease, 83, 91
and cholesterol, 91
and F GOALS, 155
and gluten, 85–87, 111
and inflammation, 84, 85, 91
and insulin resistance, 91
and lectins, 90
and legumes, 91–92
and life expectancy, 91
and Paleo diet, 46
and refined grains, 84
and short-chain fatty acids, 84, 91
and weight loss, 91
whole wheat, 86, 135
Wild Biome Super Soup, 232–33
worms, 5

yeasts/fungi, 4–5, 6
yellow-orange plants, 81
yogurt, 134

Zesty Lemon Chia Pudding, 251–53
Zhao, Liping, 65

                     ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
About the Author


Will Bulsiewicz, MD, MSCI is a board-certified, award-winning
gastroenterologist. He's a graduate of Georgetown University School of
Medicine and was chief medical resident at Northwestern Memorial Hospital
and chief gastroenterology fellow at the University of North Carolina Hospitals.
He's authored more than twenty articles in the top American gastroenterology
journals and has been featured in Shape, Women's Health, Men's Health, and on
HuffPost. He lives in Charleston, South Carolina, with his wife and two children.
                 What’s next on
                your reading list?
                    Discover your next
                        great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

                        Sign up now.
* This is referred to as “antagonistic pleiotropy,” which means that a trait that
can be helpful in certain circumstances proves to actually be harmful in other
circumstances.
