an imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright © 2021 by Shivan Sarna
Art this page copyright © Shutterstock
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes
free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this
book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing
any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing
Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Sarna, Shivan, author.
Title: Healing SIBO: Fix the real cause of IBS, bloating, and weight issues in 21 days /
   Shivan Sarna.
Description: New York: Avery, an imprint of Penguin Random House, [2021] | Includes
   index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020034728 (print) | LCCN 2020034729 (ebook) | ISBN 9780593191774
   (paperback) | ISBN 9780593191781 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Gastrointestinal system—Diseases—Popular works. | Self-care, Health—
   Popular works.
Classification: LCC RC801 .S17 2021 (print) | LCC RC801 (ebook) | DDC 616.3/3—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020034728
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020034729
p. cm.
Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services
to the individual reader. The ideas, procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are
not intended as a substitute for consulting with your physician. All matters regarding your
health require medical supervision. Neither the author nor the publisher shall be liable or
responsible for any loss or damage allegedly arising from any information or suggestion in
this book.
pid_prh_5.6.1_c0_r0
To anyone who has ever had a medical mystery
                     CONTENTS
               Foreword by Dr. Allison Siebecker

       Introduction: My Story and an Overview of the Plan

                          CHAPTER 1:
             What Is SIBO and How Do You Get It?

                          CHAPTER 2:
    Is SIBO Controlling My Weight and Making Me Anxious?

                          CHAPTER 3:
Your SIBO Medicine Cabinet: Simple Remedies for Symptom Relief

                          CHAPTER 4:
             Change Your Diet to Change Your Life

                          CHAPTER 5:
                        The 21-Day Plan

                          CHAPTER 6:
                  How to Destroy the Bacteria

                          CHAPTER 7:
               Retesting, Relapsing, Re-treating

                          CHAPTER 8:
                    SIBO-Friendly Recipes
                     Afterword
Appendix: The SIBO Specific Food Guide for Vegetarians
                 Acknowledgments
                       Index
                           Foreword

I first met Shivan Sarna when her name appeared on my list of
  telemedicine appointments one day. Initially, Shivan knew almost
nothing about SIBO except that she had it and whatever she’d been
able to find out from Dr. Google. But she was totally committed to
educating herself. For a while, we were meeting virtually (in both
senses of the word) every week, and it soon became clear that we had
a similar mission—to learn as much as possible about SIBO, spread
that knowledge, and raise awareness about this condition, which was
(and still is) actually unknown to the vast majority of people both in
and out of the medical profession.
    We started working together to fulfill this mission with a series of
free online SIBO Summits. When Shivan first told me she was
planning to hold an online health summit about SIBO, I was eager to
help. At first, I introduced her to experts in the field, convinced them
to talk to her, and helped her formulate the questions to ask them.
But after the first season, she didn’t need me to do any of those
things anymore. Now, she’s interviewed almost everyone who knows
anything about SIBO and has become an expert herself. I started out
as her doctor but quickly became her educational partner and friend.
    Shivan is uniquely qualified to write a book for the general reader
about SIBO and its relation to IBS because of the simple fact that she
is not a doctor. A book written by a medical professional wouldn’t
include all the invaluable, personal, nonmedical information and
advice that really has to come from the perspective of the educated
patient. In this book she not only consolidates all the cutting-edge
technical information she’s learned from doctors and nutritionists,
but she also walks her readers through the emotional, psychological,
and very practical issues they have to navigate and negotiate living
with SIBO on a daily basis. Shivan also brings a unique perspective
as a vegetarian and shares how to navigate SIBO healing with plant-
based foods.
    It is vitally important to provide this information to as many
people as possible, because it has been estimated that up to one
billion people around the world have IBS, and up to 78 percent of
those IBS cases have been caused by SIBO. And yet, despite these
staggering numbers, SIBO has been underfunded and under-
researched. Because it affects so many people and so often goes
undiagnosed, SIBO desperately needs all the attention it can get. So
thank you, Shivan, for sharing what you’ve learned as well as your
favorite recipes and your practical advice. I truly believe that you are
performing an invaluable service and giving hope to millions of
people with this book.

                                        —Allison Siebecker, ND, MSOM, LAc
                           INTRODUCTION



           My Story and an Overview of the Plan

I was in the bathroom sweating. It was close to three o’clock. I’d
  just finished lunch with my boss at a really fabulous restaurant,
and I had to go to the ladies’ room. I hope you don’t know what I
mean when I say I really “had to go,” but if you’re reading this
book, you probably do.
    In fact, I’ve actually heard worse “tales from the ladies’ room.”
One of my friends can’t drive for more than twenty minutes without
having to use the bathroom, which severely limits the routes she is
able to take. There are also families who haven’t seen relatives in
years because they’re afraid to be on a plane without instant access
to the facilities.
    In that instance, I was in the bathroom that day for at least
twenty minutes. This was before cell phones, and I knew that my
boss and our waiter must have been wondering what had happened
to me.
    When I finally got out of there the waiter looked worried, and
my poor boss, a polite man in his forties, asked me if I was all right.
What could I say? I just mumbled something about being sorry and
said “body functions” and shrugged my shoulders. Truthfully, I was
completely mortified and just wished I could disappear. My goal
that day had been to ask for a raise, but clearly that wasn’t
happening. He settled the bill and we left. It was awkward, to say
the least, and all these years later, I still remember it.

                               * * * *
I call my experience as a person with SIBO the journey of a lifetime
because I remember having symptoms starting as far back as the age
of four—even though I certainly had no idea what was causing them.
    Back then, our family had pizza for dinner every Friday night, and
most of those nights I threw up after dinner. My magnificent mother
was taking care of three young daughters; she was tired, and she just
wanted something that was good and fast for dinner at the end of a
busy week. She knew that I wasn’t really sick; I wasn’t getting
stomach flu every Friday evening. And she would have been horrified
if anyone thought she was being a bad mother. In fact, I actually
loved pizza night. I liked it enough going down that I was willing to
tolerate throwing it up—and it didn’t happen every single time. Still,
it should have been more of a warning sign than either of us realized.
    My father, however, was from India and well-versed in the
principles of Ayurvedic medicine, the ancient healing science of
India, which include building and maintaining a healthy metabolic
system (the conversion of food into fuel for your body) through good
digestion and excretion. According to Ayurveda, regular, healthy
bowel movements are a major indicator of good digestion and,
therefore, overall health. So, when he noticed that I wasn’t “going”
every day, he mentioned it to my mother, who began to question me
about the quantity and quality of my poops. Even at that early age, I
already felt this was none of my mom’s business. Although I now
understand that my parents were concerned about my chronic
constipation, as a five- or six-year-old, I resented being questioned
about my bathroom habits and having to sit on the toilet for what
seemed to me inordinate lengths of time day in and day out. That is
actually one of my earliest memories.
    And those weren’t the only gastrointestinal issues that appeared
very early in my life. By the time I was eight years old, I’d been to
India four times on buying trips with my parents, who were
importers of Indian art and handicrafts, and I suspect that on one or
more of those trips I must have had some kind of food poisoning,
which I now know is most often the primary cause of SIBO.
Unfortunately, neither of my parents is still alive, so I really have no
one to confirm my suspicion, but it seems logical. Basically, I was
just a skinny kid who was always constipated, with a big bloated belly
and a sensitive stomach. But I just thought that was normal.
    In middle school and high school I was uncomfortable a lot of the
time, and my friends sometimes affectionately referred to my tummy
as my Buddha belly, but for the most part—aside from one bad bout
with mononucleosis—I was too busy being a teenager to pay much
attention to my symptoms.
    Luckily, because of my father’s knowledge of Ayurvedic medicine,
which depends heavily on diet and herbal cures, and the fact that my
mother was an early advocate of natural healing, I was brought up to
follow a clean diet. By the time I was in my twenties I had given up
eating meat and drinking alcohol, and I started to meditate. All of
this put me on the spiritual path I follow to this day, and I’ve had
more than one doctor tell me that if I hadn’t been following such a
clean lifestyle, I’d probably have been even sicker.
    You’d think that I’d want to get to the root of what was causing all
my unpleasant, often painful symptoms and try to get rid of them
once and for all, but actually it took decades. For a long time, I might
mention my bathroom issues to a doctor in passing, but he or she
never seemed to think my symptoms were worth serious
consideration, and I certainly didn’t discuss my elimination habits
with my friends. It’s a taboo subject, but we need to talk about it,
especially if there is a problem. But those of us who suffer from SIBO
don’t even realize we are experiencing a true health issue because we
have become so used to our symptoms that they feel “normal.” We
think we just have a “delicate” or a “sensitive” stomach.
    At that point in my life, I was a successful yoga teacher. Shivan’s
Yoga Studio was a hotspot for healing in Sarasota, Florida. I even had
my own television program, and I traveled around the world
speaking to women about how to hone their managerial skills. I loved
the work, and I felt really good about helping so many people. But
while there are people who actually thrive on traveling, being on the
road so much of the time was wreaking havoc with my health—to the
point where I knew I just couldn’t do it anymore. This was in the
’90s. I was a vegetarian at a time when restaurants didn’t know what
to do with plant-based eaters, and, therefore, I ate enough pasta
primavera to last for the rest of my life. I was anxious about my home
and the kitties I was leaving behind every week. It was not a
sustainable lifestyle for me. Plus, I was losing my hair from the stress
and I was germophobic from being on so many planes and staying in
so many hotel rooms.
    That’s when my best friend and spiritual teacher suggested I
become a host on what was then called the Home Shopping Network.
I thought they were nuts, but, serendipitously, I met a woman at a
seminar shortly thereafter who worked at HSN. It seemed to me that
the Universe had put her in my path, so I went for an interview, and
that meeting turned out to be the pivotal event that changed my life
forever. Six months later I got the job. It fit my skill set perfectly, and
it was great that I could sleep in my own bed, be with my cats, and
see my friends. For the first six years, I was assigned the overnight
shift. I drove an hour to work in the evening, got that adrenaline rush
from appearing on TV, and then drove home and tried to sleep
during the day. Needless to say, this schedule, plus the pressures of
the work itself, really messed up my circadian rhythm, and the lack
of sleep was wreaking havoc with my health. The perfect storm was
brewing.
    I’d been feeling sick and dealing with a bloated belly even though
I was working out and eating well. Forcing yourself into slim wear to
be on television every day so that America doesn’t wonder if you are
pregnant is not a stress I would wish on anyone. So, I finally went to
see a gastroenterologist, who diagnosed me with irritable bowel
syndrome. IBS is a “functional disorder,” meaning that the
symptoms are real but doctors can’t find any obvious cause for them.
This makes it really difficult to treat. How do you cure something
that isn’t being caused by anything?
    He then prescribed an antidepressant, which was not only
discouraging but also confusing and extremely frustrating. I quite
naturally assumed he was telling me that it was all in my head while I
knew it wasn’t. I now understand that he was trying to raise my
serotonin levels, because the majority of the serotonin in your system
is actually made and stored in your gut, and it plays a significant role
in regulating gastrointestinal function. But I didn’t know that then,
and this doctor did not explain his reasoning to me. He also
suggested that running three miles a day would help, but at that
point I didn’t have the time or energy for exercise. I was living on
Maalox to calm my acid reflux, taking Benadryl to help me get to
sleep, and sleeping twelve hours a day just to have enough energy to
do the overnight shows for HSN.
    I’d already suspected that I might have IBS because I’d seen a
Netflix documentary about it, and, having been into health food and
yoga since I was a teenager, I thought I knew what to do. I was eating
a textbook “healthy” diet—plant-based foods like whole grains and
lots of fruits and veggies, so I didn’t understand why I still felt so
bad. I’d eat an apple thinking it was good for me, not knowing that
what was healthy for someone else wouldn’t work for me at all.
    The harder I tried to “be healthy,” the worse I felt—what with the
fatigue and the fact that my gastrointestinal problems were getting
worse and worse. I realized it wasn’t just random symptoms but a
pattern, and I began to get scared—very scared—thinking I might
have cancer or some other devastating illness.
    I’m normally a very social person. I loved meeting friends for
lunch, but, because I was so exhausted and felt so sick, on a regular
basis I was starting to cancel plans I had made. I was pretty much
just working, sleeping, and doing the bare minimum to stay afloat. I
was alive but not really living, and I knew I couldn’t keep going the
way I was. I needed to get to the bottom of this once and for all.
    I went back to the doctor and had more testing done, trying to
rule out anything more serious than IBS. I had virtually every kind of
scope you could think of—colonoscopy, endoscopy—basically, if it
ended in “oscopy,” I did the procedure. All my tests came back
negative. I felt worse than ever, and I wasn’t getting any closer to an
answer for my problem.
    When I finally got tested for SIBO it was almost by accident. I had
a work friend at the time who had similar gastrointestinal issues and
who was also gluten-free, and we often compared notes on our health
and diet. One day she mentioned very briefly that she had just taken
a test that required her to drink a special solution and then blow into
a tube every twenty minutes for three hours, and that, based on the
results, she was now taking what she described as a radical antibiotic
to try to solve her digestive problems. It turns out she’d taken the
SIBO breath test, and her doctor had then determined she should
take the antibiotic rifaximin (Xifaxan). Armed with this information,
I called Dr. Run-Three-Miles for a prescription so that I could go to
the University of South Florida and get tested myself (see this page
for more on the SIBO breath test).
    Three weeks after taking the test I received the results (these days
you can get test results almost immediately and even take the test at
home), which were negative. By that time, I had changed doctors and
was seeing another gastroenterologist named Michael Schulman,
who a friend had told me was a “digestion detective” and would
definitely be able to help me. On my first visit, he sat with me for two
hours, which to me was unbelievable, and he kept insisting that he
wanted to see the full results from my test and interpret them
himself. But I just kept saying that it had come back negative and
shrugging it off. I was just too overwhelmed by everything I had to
deal with to find that piece of paper or call the doctor’s office to get it
sent over. It took about a year and a half (really) before he finally
convinced me to call my previous gastroenterologist’s office. Part of
my reluctance was undoubtedly because I’d already left the practice
and therefore assumed that they’d give me a hard time. In the end,
however, the woman who answered the phone couldn’t have been
nicer or more helpful.
   When I handed the form to the “digestion detective,” he told me
that in fact I should have been told the test was positive—the results
had been interpreted incorrectly. If I hadn’t allowed my fear to hold
me back, I could have had that information a lot sooner. I had
learned my lesson.
   So now I knew. Not only did I have IBS; I had the number one
underlying cause of IBS, small intestine bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).
Bacteria were overgrowing in my small intestine, causing my
symptoms. That was a huge turning point for me. Finally, I not only
had a name for my condition, I also had an explanation for
symptoms that were terrorizing me. For the first time, I had hope
that I might find a cure.
   I wasn’t alone, and I wondered how many other people were
struggling with pain and had no idea it was being caused by SIBO. I
was both angry and relieved. I vowed to find out everything I could
about SIBO. The more research I did, the clearer it became that there
wasn’t very much information to be had from the usual mainstream
sources. My life suddenly had an additional purpose—to become as
much of an expert as possible and pass on my knowledge to as many
people as would listen. I wanted to know everything: How many
people have IBS? How many have SIBO? What percentage has only
IBS and what percentage has both? How did I get it? What were the
treatments? How could I keep myself from ever getting it again once
I was cured? My starting point for fulfilling that purpose was to
develop an increasingly intimate relationship with Dr. Google,
meaning that I was on a DIY quest for information. That isn’t
unusual for people with problems about which the traditional
medical community isn’t necessarily well informed, but it can lead to
information that is often controversial and can sometimes be
misleading. It shouldn’t, but often does, at least for a while, take the
place of a doctor’s visit. But the good news is that it also connects
people to good doctors whom they would otherwise never have
known about.
    Eventually my exhaustive online searching led me to Dr. Allison
Siebecker, a brilliant naturopathic physician who is a fellow SIBO
sufferer and whose medical career is devoted to SIBO. Her website,
siboinfo.com, has been an invaluable resource to millions of people
and helped put SIBO on the map. When I reached out to her initially,
she was concentrating on research and wasn’t taking any new
patients, so I continued to see my gastroenterologist. Thankfully, he
was open to considering whatever information I was able to gather
from my own research, and willing to try new treatments that had
shown promise in trials or helped other patients. I would literally
walk into his office with a study I’d printed off PubMed and he’d read
it right there while I waited. He was smart, he was humble, and he
was open to suggestions.


                  Know Before You Go—to the Doctor
  You’ve finally made an appointment to see a doctor, and whether you’re
  using telemedicine or visiting someone the old-fashioned way, you really
  need to be prepared in order to maximize every moment with your expert of
  choice. Here are a few tips on what you need to know, what you need to
  take with you, and what you need to ask in order to make your doctor’s
  appointment as efficient, informative, and effective as possible.

    Don’t Depend on Your Memory. Trust me on this one. Make a list of what
    you want to cover and check it twice. I have walked out of the office more
    than once only to cuss loudly in the parking lot because of what I’d
    forgotten to ask! You can even audio record your conversations with your
    doctor so that you can review them again later. (Be sure to ask for
    permission first.)
    Know Your Symptoms. Write down all the symptoms you’ve been
    experiencing and when they occurred, even if you think they might not be
    relevant. Indicate any symptoms that are new. Include symptoms that
    come and go, too.
    Keep Track of Your History. Make a list of all tests you may already have
    taken, along with when they were done, and take copies of the results you
    were given. Tell your doctor what diagnoses you received from other
    doctors, and bring notes about treatments other practitioners tried and
    how you felt afterward.
    Discuss What You’ve Tried on Your Own. Have you been experimenting
    with treatments at home? What were the results?
    Bring Your Research. Make copies of any studies you have found to leave
    for your doctor to review.
    Determine What Tests You’d Like Your Doctor to Run and Why. This is
    where having a study to show the efficacy of the test could definitely be
    helpful.
    Decide What Prescriptions You Want the Doctor to Fill. Bring any written
    information or studies you have to show why they are effective. Write
    down your pharmacy information to leave with the doctor. If you are really
    anxious and afraid your pharmacy won’t carry the medication you’ll be
    asking for, call the pharmacy in advance to find out if they think they will
    have a hard time getting it quickly. I’ve done this on more than one
    occasion, and the pharmacist thanked me for giving him (or her) a heads-
    up.
    Be Nice! Thank the gatekeepers. Those overworked front desk folks are
    possibly the difference between getting your next appointment when you
    need it or waiting months and months. A smile and a thank-you go a long
    way. (Remembering their names is nice, too.)
    You Are the Customer. Remember, you have the power to fire your doctor
    if you are not feeling that you are getting the care you need.
    Keep a Question Journal. Keep a big list of all your questions in one place
    and, as they get answered by your research or your doctor, you can check
    them off. I find that doing that really gives me a sense of accomplishment
    and lets me feel that I’m making progress, even when things don’t seem to
    be going so well.

     AND YES, all this requires you to be super organized. It is a pain in the
  neck but worth it. I know.



   Meanwhile, I stalked the appointment page of Dr. Siebecker’s
website on and off for a year until, one day, I saw that, miraculously,
she was back from her research hiatus. I immediately booked ten
appointments with her. I know this sounds crazy—in truth it seemed
crazy to me at the time, especially since we were going to have to
work together remotely. I wasn’t yet familiar with telemedicine, but
since I was able to send her my various test results and then describe
my symptoms and reactions over Skype, it wasn’t really necessary for
me to be physically sitting in her exam room. Do keep this in mind as
you search for your own doctor. You don’t have to be constrained by
geography—telemedicine is an extremely viable alternative, allowing
you to see specialists no matter where they live. It is one of the best
uses of the Internet I can think of—that and cat videos, of course.
    Once we began working together, I started to get a better
understanding of what SIBO actually was. I was surprised at every
one of our sessions to learn something new—such as the fact that the
herbs that helped one type of SIBO could make another type worse;
what tests to take and in what order; and, yes, what to eat (and what
not to eat!). And throughout the process Dr. Siebecker assured me
that among the complicated cases she usually saw, mine was not
atypical. She believed that together we would get to the root of my
problem, heal my intestines, and figure out how to manage my health
going forward. But it was going to take time, and we might wind up
having to take a few detours along the way. I was so relieved. My
stress level was going down for the first time in years. We had a plan,
and I was finally regaining my sense of hope.
    At that point, my determination to be a patient advocate really
kicked in. My husband was studying for his CPA exam, and for the
first time since the ’80s I had some time on my hands. I was on a
mission—not only to heal myself but to use my story as well as the
information I was gathering to prevent other people from having to
go down the same long and painful road I had traveled. So, I started
to keep a journal and make notes about what I learned. Typically,
doctors are not taught much about SIBO in traditional medical
schools—Dr. Siebecker has brought SIBO curriculum into
naturopathic medical schools, but traditional medical schools do not
offer training in it. So, as an educated patient, I knew I could become
a desperately needed source on healing for both myself and for
others. Before I knew it, I’d done so much research that I realized I
could write an entire book.
    Every medical practitioner I’ve worked with has encouraged me to
share this information with others because they know firsthand how
hard it is for SIBO sufferers to find advice they can trust. But it was
really the encouragement of Linda Bennett, my spiritual teacher, that
convinced me I must really sit down and write this book.
    In this book, I’ve brought together all I have learned about SIBO
over the years, including the plan that helped me get my life back.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
In the following pages, I’ll explain exactly what SIBO is, what causes
it, and what puts you at risk. Then, we’re going to dive into a plan
that will help you feel 90 percent better in only 21 days and teach you
how to resolve your SIBO for good. Here are the important steps:

Step 1: Get Tested
Find out if SIBO is actually what ails you: You’ll learn all about
testing for SIBO in Chapter 1.

Step 2: Learn Quick Symptom-Relief Strategies
Discover the tried-and-true tricks doctors and patients rely on to
start feeling better right away. You’ll find all this information in
Chapter 3.

Step 3: Remake Your Diet
In Chapters 4 and 5 you’ll learn exactly what to eat and what to avoid
to help reduce symptoms and feel better, including a 21-day meal
plan with simple recipes.

Step 4: Choose the Right Treatment
Diet alone won’t get rid of SIBO, so in Chapter 6, I explain the
medical treatments you can use to kick this condition for good.

Step 5: Manage Your Symptoms over Time
In Chapter 7 you’ll learn what to do moving forward to keep on
feeling good.
    The plan in this book will not only help you overcome SIBO but
will also empower you with an understanding of what is happening
in your body. You’ll be more confident talking with your doctor, and
if symptoms flare up, you’ll understand why and what to do to get
back to feeling better.
    My journey with SIBO has been full of trial and error, but,
ultimately, my life has been completely transformed, and yours can
be, too. In this book, I’ll distill what I’ve learned and offer you the
powerful tools that will help you get your health back on track.
                              CHAPTER 1



           What Is SIBO and How Do You Get It?

S   IBO stands for small intestine bacterial overgrowth. It is a kind of
    microbial dysbiosis, or an imbalance in the small intestine. It is
often confused with an infection, but it is not, as the overgrown
bacteria aren’t pathogenic. The problem is simply one of location:
These bacteria shouldn’t grow in large numbers in the small
intestine. When they do, it creates a variety of health challenges.
SIBO is a condition caused by something else, and it causes
symptoms of its own.
    Most people have never heard of SIBO, much less know what
those letters stand for. I’ve been interested in health for as long as I
can remember, so I couldn’t believe I had never heard of SIBO. That
is the exact reason why I wrote this book: to help shine a light on a
health issue that has not gotten enough attention.
    What actually happens in your body after you chew your food and
before you poop remains something of a mystery for most of us. So,
before you can understand SIBO, you really need to know a little bit
more about digestion.
    When you chew and swallow food, it goes down your esophagus
and into your stomach first. Your stomach actually sits much higher
in your abdomen than you might think—right underneath your rib
cage. The food is broken down by stomach acid (which also helps kill
any pathogens or bacteria that traveled in on your food). Then, from
the stomach, chyme, which is food that’s now partially digested and
mixed with stomach acid, moves into the small intestine.
    At just about twenty feet long, the small intestine is actually
longer than your large intestine. It sits coiled in your lower belly with
the large intestine wrapped around it. In the small intestine, chyme
is broken down into nutrients that can be absorbed by your body,
which then move down to your large intestine, where the vast
majority of bacteria are supposed to live.




The trillions of bacteria and other microorganisms in your large
intestine are collectively known as your intestinal microbiome. In
total, they weigh about the same amount as your brain and help
perform many necessary functions. In addition to occupying your
large intestine, bacteria also live in your mouth, on your skin, and
even in your genitals, all of which have their own microbiomes.
    Normally, your small intestine should contain very few bacteria.
Many are killed by stomach acid before they even reach the small
intestine; others are quickly flushed out and moved into the large
intestine. But under certain conditions bacteria begin to proliferate
in the small intestine and then feed on particular kinds of
carbohydrates you have eaten. The bacteria turn these carbohydrates
into acids and gas. The medical term for that process is fermentation.
    The type of gas they create is methane, hydrogen, or hydrogen
sulfide, depending on what type of bacteria are overgrown. And
because the bacteria are in the small intestine, the gas then causes a
whole confluence of symptoms that range from mildly embarrassing
to seriously painful and debilitating, including bloating, cramps,
nausea, acid reflux, diarrhea, constipation, and more. (Methane is
associated with constipation, hydrogen is associated with diarrhea,
and hydrogen sulfide is associated with d diarrhea.)
    SIBO is like real estate—it’s all about location, location, location.
It happens when bacteria—which in the right place would be a good
thing—overgrow where they don’t belong.
    The fermentation of carbohydrates in the small intestine can even
lead to either weight loss or weight gain with malnutrition, because
the bacteria interfere with proper digestion and either increase the
number of calories your body absorbs or use up vital nutrients to
feed themselves instead of feeding you. And that, in a nutshell, is
small intestine bacterial overgrowth.
    If you’ve noticed that the symptoms of SIBO are basically the
same as those used to describe and define irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS), that’s because SIBO is often the cause of IBS. Recent data
suggest that up to 78 percent of people with IBS have SIBO. The
problem is that most people never get past treating their symptoms
to finding, and addressing, the root cause.


                            IBS, SIBO, and IBD
  IBS is irritable bowel syndrome; IBD is inflammatory bowel disease. It’s
  important to know the difference between the two and to understand how
  SIBO came to be stuck in the middle. Irritable bowel syndrome is basically
  diagnosed based on a collection of symptoms including abdominal pain or
  discomfort, diarrhea or constipation or both, and bloating that have no other
  obvious cause. You probably wouldn’t be diagnosed with IBS until other
  causes of your symptoms had been ruled out. But, in the majority of cases,
  those symptoms are caused by SIBO, which is the one thing for which you
  probably won’t be tested. Now you can see why so many people live with
  this condition for so long.
      Inflammatory bowel disease, on the other hand, is a serious condition
  that includes ulcerative colitis, which is defined by inflammation of the colon,
  and Crohn’s disease, in which the inflammation affects the entire GI tract.
  Therefore, if you have digestive symptoms, it’s very important to rule out IBD
  before assuming it is “just” IBS or SIBO.
      At the same time, it’s important to note that both Crohn’s and colitis can
  cause SIBO via structural changes.
      So, to be clear, SIBO can (and most often does) cause IBS, and IBD
  (that is, Crohn’s disease or colitis) can cause SIBO.



    As I’ve said, many doctors still don’t know much, if anything,
about SIBO, so IBS is generally accepted as a final diagnosis rather
than a group of symptoms requiring further investigation. Therefore,
while it’s sometimes frowned upon for patients to take control of
their health by consulting Dr. Google, in the case of SIBO it really is
essential that you do so. Although it is just now becoming better
understood, many doctors still have never heard of SIBO, let alone
know what tests are needed to diagnose it or the multistep treatment
protocols that can eradicate it.
    And if you feel silly or embarrassed bringing this information to
your doctor, I understand. It can be intimidating to tell a doctor, “I
think I have this.” But many physicians have actually thanked me for
the work I’m doing to educate their patients, since there is so little
awareness of SIBO in either medical or popular health circles.
    In fact, if you have IBS and you’ve come across this book, this may
very well be your lucky day. Millions of people with IBS believe that
all they can do to deal with their situation is to be very careful about
what they eat and take laxatives or antidiarrheals for the rest of their
life—which is, of course, the very definition of treating the symptoms
instead of the disease.
    For a long time, that was me, but now I know better. There is
help. There is hope, and answers do exist. Not only can you start to
feel better quite quickly, but there is also hope for a drastic reduction
of symptoms, remission, and, yes, in many cases a cure.
   But if SIBO can cause IBS, that begs the question: What causes
SIBO? The small intestine normally has many protections against
bacterial accumulation. They are:

    stomach acid, which kills bacteria
    bile, which also kills bacteria
    enzymes, which kill bacteria or arrest their growth
    the immune system, which kills bacteria and all kinds of other
    invaders
    normal small intestine anatomy, which moves the bacteria
    through and out of the small intestine
    the ileocecal valve, which is designed to prevent bacteria from
    the large intestine from backing up into the small intestine
    the migrating motor complex, which moves bacteria out of the
    small intestine

    I’ll be explaining all of these in detail in the pages that follow, but
for the moment, I want you to understand that, according to Dr.
Siebecker, one or more of these protections needs to fail in order for
SIBO to occur. And remember, it’s not a question of whether the
bacteria are good or bad, or how they overgrew in the small intestine
in the first place. We know that bacteria either sneak down from
above, overgrow from within the small intestine, or move back up
from the large intestine below. It’s really about having too many
bacteria in the wrong place.
    So now we have to wonder, why would one or more of these
protections fail? We need to think about why the bacteria aren’t
being removed. Why are they not being handled? Why are they
accumulating? What was the underlying cause of your SIBO?
    By far the most common cause of SIBO is food
poisoning. Approximately one in six Americans or forty-eight
million people (and one in ten or about eight hundred million
worldwide) get a foodborne illness every year, and approximately 10
percent of them will then develop “postinfectious” IBS, which in this
case is caused by SIBO. According to the newest research, IBS caused
by food poisoning is SIBO. In fact, Dr. Mark Pimentel, an
internationally known SIBO researcher and executive director of the
Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program at
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, believes that “about 60 to 70 percent of
IBS is caused by food poisoning, especially IBS with diarrhea.” The
MAST Program focuses on the development of drugs, diagnostic
tests, and devices related to conditions of the microbiome.



FOOD POISONING AND SIBO—A POTENTIALLY
VICIOUS CYCLE
I’m sure you’ve heard about foods being recalled because they might
contain E. coli or salmonella, Campylobacter jejuni, or shigella.
What you might not realize, however, is that those are all types of
bacteria that produce a nerve toxin called cytolethal distending toxin
B (Cdt-B), which causes acute gastroenteritis—commonly known as
food poisoning. When we get food poisoning our body produces
antibodies to fight and destroy the bacteria and their toxins, and for
about 90 percent of us that means we first suffer a severe bout of
diarrhea or vomiting (or both), and then the army of antibodies
that’s been deployed to fight the bacteria does its job, they go back to
their barracks, we get better, and that’s that. But for the remaining
10 percent, it could well mean the onset of SIBO. If you think 10
percent sounds like a relatively low number, remember that about
forty-eight million Americans get food poisoning every year. Ten
percent of forty-eight million is almost five million people who could
potentially get SIBO every year in the United States alone.
   Here’s why: When you’re exposed to Cdt-B toxin because you
have food poisoning, the antibodies you produce to fight it can get
confused and, in effect, start a war with the wrong adversary. This
happens because parts of the Cdt-B toxin are very similar in
structure to vinculin, a protein that plays a key role in connecting
nerve cells to one another. So, sometimes the antibodies designed to
bind with and fight-off the Cdt-B toxin mistakenly bind with vinculin
as well, killing off a key protein in your body with friendly fire—or, in
more scientific terms, you experience an autoimmune response. We
know this because, after a bout of food poisoning, blood tests might
show that you have antibodies to both Cdt-B and vinculin.
   Digestion itself takes place in the small intestine (which is about
twenty feet long, four times longer than the large intestine), and the
waste products of the digestive process then move down through the
large intestine and are ultimately excreted in your stool. When the
vinculin is compromised, it damages the nerves that help create the
migrating motor complex (MMC), a type of peristalsis that sweeps
through your intestines after you’ve finished digesting and moves
any leftover particles from your small intestine into your large
intestine and, eventually, out of your body through elimination. It’s
often called the “housekeeper wave” and I think of it like someone
coming through and sweeping all the crumbs out of your small
intestine and into your large intestine.
   Have you ever been sitting in a meeting only to be mortified by
the sound of your stomach grumbling? That grumble sound is
actually created by your migrating motor complex at work. It’s
nothing to be embarrassed about; in fact, it’s actually a sign that your
body is doing what it is supposed to do. In a healthy person, the
migrating motor complex should be “turned on” between meals and
occur at ninety-minute intervals so long as you’ve finished digesting
and haven’t eaten anything since.
   When the MMC is compromised, that sweeping doesn’t take place
enough, so the bacteria remain in your small intestine and start to
overgrow, “eating” whatever undigested food is there, fermenting it
into gas, which in turn creates bloating and other symptoms. Bottom
line: You get SIBO/IBS. In fact, the number one physiologic
underlying cause of SIBO is thought to be slow motility in the small
intestine—that is, a deficient migrating motor complex, most often
caused by food poisoning.
   Don’t remember having food poisoning? If not, you may still have
had a mild case. But even a mild case of food poisoning can trigger
IBS. And even if you haven’t been diagnosed with food poisoning, if
you’ve had a bout of diarrhea or thought you had the stomach flu,
you may very well have had food poisoning. Since the symptoms are
the same, it’s hard to tell them apart. Unless you got tested at the
time, you wouldn’t know if it was bacterial or viral. It’s the bacterial
food poisoning that leads to SIBO/IBS.
   Some people might have acute food poisoning and then they get
better but continue to have some diarrhea because now they have
SIBO. But for others, SIBO onset can be delayed for up to three
months, which makes it difficult to connect that bout of food
poisoning with the onset of SIBO. Of course, not everyone who gets
food poisoning goes on to develop SIBO, but just having this
information could help make you more vigilant about what you’re
eating, where it comes from, and the long-term effects it might have.
    Plus, if you have SIBO from food poisoning (postinfectious IBS),
you’re more likely to get food poisoning again. You could sit at the
same table and eat the same food as others, and be the only one who
gets sick, because your MMC has already been compromised. You
might think that people who travel a lot—particularly to countries
whose sanitation systems are different from ours—would be the ones
at risk, but simply eating at your local salad bar might also put you at
risk.
    That’s why I encourage anyone with digestive issues like IBS or
SIBO to be tested for anti-Cdt-B and anti-vinculin antibodies. It’s a
simple blood test called ibs-smart that can reveal a lot about your
health, but it’s also relatively new, so you’ll probably have to ask your
doctor to order it for you, and you may even have to inform him or
her that it exists.
    If your blood tests positive, as mine did, there’s a more than 95
percent chance that your SIBO/IBS was caused by food poisoning
(which is also known as “postinfectious IBS”). I know that I
previously said IBS was a functional disorder diagnosed only by a
process of elimination, but this new test is changing that. Just
knowing that you have post-infectious IBS (SIBO from food
poisoning) can tell you a lot about what treatments might work best
for you and what you can do to avoid getting it again.



ADHESIONS AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS
Adhesions are basically internal scars made of collagen fibers, and
for the most part they serve a useful purpose by holding things
together after a trauma such as surgery or even something as
ordinary as falling off your bicycle or getting hit in the stomach with
a ball as a kid. Mine came from having a seat belt dig into me when I
was in a car accident. But what makes adhesions so powerful can
make them so difficult to live with because the collagen fibers of
which they are made are pound-for-pound stronger than steel. Think
about a heavy-duty rope tied in knots so tight there’s nothing you can
do to unknot them. That’s a good way to envision an adhesion. And
sometimes, depending on where they are in your body, adhesions
can physically obstruct the normal flow of the small intestine and
prevent bacteria from moving through as they should.
    Ironically (and unfortunately), very often, when people develop
adhesions following surgery, the response of traditional medicine is
to do another surgery to remove them, which may then lead to even
more adhesions. Not unlike repeated cases of food poisoning,
repeated surgeries can create a vicious cycle that increases your risk
for developing SIBO.
    A little known fact is that endometriosis is another cause of
adhesions and, therefore, a cause of SIBO. When endometrial tissue
grows outside the uterus, that buildup of tissue can cause
inflammation, which then leads to the formation of scar tissue.
Ironically, scar tissue is part of the healing process.


                             Treating Adhesions
  For years surgery was the only treatment option, but now there’s a new
  technique that was pioneered by Larry Wurn, LMT, the founder and director
  of Clear Passage, a network of research and treatment clinics in the United
  States and the United Kingdom that treat adhesion-related problems,
  including bowel obstructions, SIBO, and pain. The Wurn Technique is a
  hands-on, noninvasive treatment that can dissolve adhesions. Find a Wurn
  practitioner at http://www.clearpassage.com/who-we-are/locations/.
      Visceral manipulation is another hands-on technique that has been very
  beneficial for me with adhesions. Find a visceral manipulation practitioner at
  https://www.barralinstitute.com/.
      Another form of relatively noninvasive treatment is neural therapy, which
  involves injecting a kind of Novocain into a specific area.



   In addition to adhesions, there are structural problems that can
cause SIBO, such as small intestine diverticulosis, which means that
you have pockets protruding from the wall of your small intestinal
tract because the SIBO bacteria tend to accumulate in those pockets.
   Your small intestine is quite literally like a hose, and we all know
what happens to a hose with a twist or a kink in it: Water backs up.
You can be born with a twist or kink in your intestines (so think back
to how long you’ve had digestive issues), but you can also develop
one as a result of surgery, or it can happen later in life. Stricture,
compression, or even a tumor in the small intestine (to name just a
few), could also physically obstruct and prevent the clearance of the
microbes, leading to SIBO.
   And then there’s blind loop syndrome, which occurs when a
segment of the small intestine gets cut off from the flow of the MMC
from a certain type of surgery, creating the perfect conditions for
bacteria to start multiplying.
   Since blind loop syndrome, kinks, twists, strictures, and
adhesions can all result from abdominal or intestinal surgery of any
kind, if you’ve ever had an appendectomy, a C-section, a gastric
bypass, or any other type of abdominal surgery, these possible causes
of SIBO should definitely be on your radar.



PROKINETICS—WHAT THEY ARE AND WHAT
THEY DO
Prokinetics are a group of drugs that work to keep food and bacteria
moving through your digestive tract. Slowed small intestine motility
is one of the most common causes of SIBO.
    Multiple factors can affect motility, but food poisoning may be the
most common. Food poisoning that causes postinfectious IBS slows
small intestine motility because the autoimmune response attacks
the vinculin, which then causes your migrating motor complex to
stop functioning as it should. If you have postinfectious IBS from
food poisoning, you’ll want to be sure that you’re taking prokinetics
to help get things moving.
    Prokinetics are not laxatives; their purpose is to stimulate the
MMC so that the bacteria are swept out of your small intestine
instead of building up where they don’t belong. Depending on the
dose, they may or may not cause you to have a bowel movement.
Doses of prokinetics for those with SIBO are low and can be taken by
those with diarrhea.
    An important note: Prokinetics should always be taken on an
empty stomach so that they can stimulate the MMC. Personally, I
take mine at night, since I know I’ll be fasting while I’m asleep.
              Dr. Siebecker’s Recommended Prokinetics

  PRESCRIPTION
  Low-dose prucalopride (0.5–1 mg per day), sold in the United States under
  the brand name Motegrity (called Resolor or Resotran in other countries).
      Low-dose erythromycin (50 mg per day). It isn’t sold in such a low dose
  unless you have it specially compounded, but you can ask your doctor to
  prescribe a 250-mg pill and cut it in quarters with a pill cutter.
      Low-dose naltrexone (LDN for short) (2.5–5 mg per day). This is
  generally used in combination with other prokinetics and has many benefits,
  including reducing inflammation, helping autoimmunity, and reducing pain.
  Dosing varies, so work with a practitioner. This medication literally changed
  my life. Find out more at https://ldnresearchtrust.org/.


  HERBAL/NATURAL
  Iberogast (see this page)
      Ginger Root. There have been many studies on the use of ginger as a
  prokinetic. Many people swear by it, but it can cause “ginger burn” in some
  people, which is a hot feeling in the esophagus. If you have acid reflux, this
  would probably not be a good choice for you.
      Dr. Siebecker recommends the following prokinetics that contain ginger,
  as well:

    Prokine (Vita Aid)
    MotilPro (Pure Encapsulations)
    Motility Activator (Integrative Therapeutics)
    GI Motility Complex (Enzyme Science)
    SIBO-MMC (Priority One)
    Bio.Me Kinetic (Invivo, UK)



   I should also mention here that if your SIBO was, in fact, caused
by food poisoning, you may need to remain on low doses of
prescription or herbal prokinetics for life and/or rotate them to keep
your symptoms at bay.



MEDICATIONS—A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD?
It’s unfortunate but true that the very medications you take to save
your life can also have unintended life-altering side effects, one of
which might be developing SIBO.
    Antibiotic use can lead to SIBO by slowing intestinal motility.
This is confusing for many because antibiotics are also used to treat
SIBO. But the antibiotics used for SIBO are very specific and
uniquely suited to treat SIBO. I’ll explain exactly why and how in the
coming chapters.
    According to a primary care review published in the December
2016 Mayo Clinic Proceedings, patients who use narcotics—and
opioids in particular—or proton-pump inhibitors are at increased
risk for developing SIBO.
    Opioids are generally prescribed for pain management, and while
they may be effective for reducing pain in both the short and the long
term, they also are known for causing opioid-induced bowel
dysfunction whose symptoms include constipation, anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux disease (heartburn or GERD),
delayed digestion, abdominal pain, flatulence, bloating, hard stool,
straining during bowel movement, and incomplete evacuation. In
general, they slow things down, including digestion and, particularly,
the functioning of the MMC, so it’s no coincidence that many of these
symptoms are the same as the symptoms of SIBO.
    When you’re given anesthesia for surgery, digestion is
suppressed, and then, after surgery, you’re given opioids for pain. In
effect, you’re being hit with a double whammy. But even people who
take opioids in the short term to treat pain from an acute condition
such as shingles or even a dental procedure very often find their
digestion is disrupted. Dr. Mark Pimentel has told me that as little as
a few days of opioids can lead to SIBO if the MMC is already
compromised, so using a prokinetic anytime you take opioids is
important for prevention.



RADIATION
At least one study has found that 20 to 25 percent of people who
receive pelvic radiation develop gastrointestinal problems associated
with SIBO. My friend Karen was one of those people who developed
SIBO after receiving radiation after cancer surgery, which also left
her with adhesions.
   Intestinal radiation toxicity, also called post-radiation
enteropathy, can cause a wide range of symptoms (including pain
after eating, obstruction of the small intestine, bloating, diarrhea,
and the inability to absorb various nutrients) that may be caused by
damage done to the small intestine itself, by bacterial overgrowth, or
by lactose intolerance—all of which are associated with SIBO.



THYROID ISSUES
The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located in the neck that
produces hormones. It is closely linked to the gut, and even formed
at the same time as the gut in utero. Thyroid issues, both hyper- and
hypothyroidism, and SIBO can have the same symptoms: weight
gain or loss, constipation, diarrhea, bloating, and fatigue. However,
thyroid issues can also be an underlying cause for SIBO, as the
hormones produced by the thyroid can impact motility directly, with
hypothyroidism causing constipation.



WHY KNOWING THE CAUSE IS IMPORTANT
As you can see, it’s complicated, and sometimes getting to the root
cause can be like trying to solve a really knotty problem. In fact, you
might be wondering why that even matters. “I have this thing and I
want to get rid of it. Why does it matter how I got it?” The answer is
that the cause may, at least to some degree, dictate the cure.
   In addition, it’s essential to determine the cause of your
symptoms because SIBO can present with the same symptoms as
other diseases, so you can’t really be sure you have it unless you take
the SIBO breath test.



THE SIBO BREATH TEST
The best way to determine if you have SIBO is to take the SIBO
breath test. Most breath tests check for the presence of hydrogen and
methane, two gases created by the SIBO-producing organisms. As of
this writing, a new test can also determine the presence of hydrogen
sulfide gas, as well as hydrogen and methane. This is important
because it is one of the factors that determines what type of SIBO you
have and, therefore, what type of treatment will work best for you.
Methane is associated with constipation, while hydrogen and
hydrogen sulfide are associated with diarrhea. Research has also
shown that as PPM (parts per million) of hydrogen sulfide rises, so
does diarrhea severity.
    Why a breath test instead of an MRI, an X-ray, or a CT scan?
Because the SIBO overgrowth doesn’t show up on that kind of
imaging. You may have heard or been told that you can take a stool
test or a urine organic acid test, but neither one of those really works
for diagnosing SIBO. The stool test actually reflects what is in the
large intestine, and the urine test can show that there is a bacterial
overgrowth somewhere in the large or small intestine, but it doesn’t
show which location specifically has the overgrowth. A small bowel
culture could theoretically diagnose SIBO, but because the small
intestine is so long, and so deeply nestled inside your body, doing
any sort of test like that is very invasive. And even then, these tests
can’t reach much past the first few inches of the small intestine and,
therefore, might not detect SIBO farther along, even when it is
present.
    Endoscopy will show the upper portion of the (not so small) small
intestine, and a colonoscopy will show the lower portion, but the
approximately seventeen feet in the middle are not shown in either
of these tests, according to Dr. Siebecker.
    That doesn’t mean that these tests might not be useful for
determining whether you have a problem other than SIBO or that is
also causing SIBO. You should discuss their potential efficacy with
your doctor, but the bottom line is that if you suspect SIBO, the best
way to rule it out (or in) is with a breath test, and there is no reason
why you shouldn’t be able to take one.

Taking the SIBO Breath Test
Before you take the test you’ll need to do a bit of advance planning.
To prepare, you need to follow a very restricted diet for twelve hours
and then fast overnight for twelve hours before taking the test. The
only foods allowed for vegetarians on the prep diet are eggs,
sometimes potatoes, sometimes cheese, white rice, white bread,
black coffee or tea with no dairy or sweetener, and water. If it isn’t on
the list, you can’t have it, so be sure to check the specific diet that
comes with your test. I know, it sounds terrible, even for those of you
who may have already been following a restricted diet for SIBO. But
it’s for a good reason: The point is to lower your carbohydrate levels
so that the bacteria have nothing to feed on and you can, therefore,
get a baseline gas level at the start of the test and see the bacterial
response to the test solution. If you haven’t properly completed the
prep, you won’t get accurate results, so don’t cheat! If you have
constipation, you might be better off following the prep diet for two
days to be sure you get accurate results.
    Once you’ve completed the prep, you drink a particular kind of
sugar solution (glucose or lactulose, as discussed below) that feeds
the bacteria and thus encourages them to produce gas. The presence
and quantity of the bacteria are determined by the amount of gas
produced, because humans do not normally produce these gases,
which are by-products of the fermentation of carbohydrates
consumed by the bacteria.
    It takes some advance prep and it is time-consuming but is
otherwise painless.


                         Lactulose versus Glucose
  There are two types of sugar solution that can be used in the SIBO breath
  test.
      Glucose is available without a prescription but is of limited value
  because it only tests for SIBO bacteria that are in the first two or three feet
  of the small intestine (your small intestine can be seventeen to twenty-five-
  feet long). So, you might get a false negative result.
      Lactulose is a different type of sugar solution that, in the United States,
  can be obtained only with a prescription but is more likely to provide an
  accurate result because it tests all the way down to the bottom of the small
  intestine and because humans cannot digest or absorb lactulose; only
  bacteria have the enzyme that allows them to do this.



  When the bacteria “eat” the lactulose they make hydrogen and
methane gas, particularly in the small intestine, which then enters
your bloodstream and travels to the lungs, where it is released when
you breathe. Hence, the SIBO “breath” test.
   You then blow into a tube every twenty minutes over the course of
three hours to capture that gas. It generally takes about two hours for
the lactulose to travel through the small intestine, but if you have a
slow transit time (which I do), it may take longer; therefore, doing
the three hours provides a safety net, so to speak, even though some
doctors will tell you it isn’t necessary. According to Dr. Siebecker, a
three-hour test also represents methane and hydrogen sulfide better
than a shorter test.
   Humans can’t make methane or hydrogen gas on their own, so if
they are present in high amounts in the small intestine, it means you
have SIBO. But reading the results isn’t as black and white as it
might seem, so it’s important that you see a doctor who is familiar
with SIBO and with what the test results really mean. When my
“digestive detective” doctor reread the results of my SIBO breath
test, he saw that they clearly showed a spike in hydrogen in my body,
indicating the presence of bacteria. My first doctor had completely
missed this.
   My personal experience with this test is that the lactulose didn’t
make me feel very well, probably because of all the fermentation it
created, and I also didn’t enjoy sitting in the doctor’s waiting room
for three hours, periodically breathing into a tube. For those reasons
I much prefer to take the test at home, which many doctors will let
you do. In fact, there’s even a kit you can use to collect your breath
samples at home and then mail them to a lab to be tested. Whether
you do it at home or in a doctor’s office, however, my advice is to be
your own “digestion detective” and get as much information as you
can. Get the test results printed out and look at the graph yourself.
   One caveat is that simply taking the test can create—or increase—
SIBO-induced brain fog (see this page), so you need to be very
careful (or have someone help you) with labeling the samples. I once
had to scrap an entire test—after doing the prep and completing
almost the entire three hours—because I spaced out on the labeling
near the end. For that reason, I recommend that you use two timers
—a kitchen-type timer and one on your phone. Trust me on this. It
isn’t worth getting confused and forgetting something that causes
you to go through the whole thing all over again. And label
everything before you start.
    It also makes sense to do the test first thing in the morning, since
you have to fast for twelve hours before taking it, and, based on my
own experience, I would suggest giving yourself the rest of the day
off. Don’t make any big plans for what to do afterward. Some people
do just fine, even taking the test at work in between meetings! But
for me, creating all that gas caused my symptoms to flare up, and all
I wanted to do was lie down and rest as soon as possible. In addition
to the simple stress of completing the test, restricting your carb
intake and then drinking a sugar solution can really mess with your
blood sugar levels, as it definitely did with mine.
    You can order the test yourself, your doctor can give you a
prescription to order the test, or they can order it for you to take
either at home or in the office. Having said that, it’s possible that
your doctor won’t be familiar with the test or won’t want to order it.
You’d be amazed by how often that happens. So, my advice is to take
all of your information with you. Not even the most knowledgeable
doctors can know everything about everything, but they should at
least be open to learning. That said, even if your doctor is open-
minded, if he or she isn’t familiar with the breath test, it might be
time for you to look for a new doctor who is. If someone doesn’t
know the test, there’s a good chance he also won’t know how to
interpret the results or which treatments would be appropriate.


          How and Where to Get the Lactulose Breath Test
  In case your doctor isn’t familiar with the SIBO breath test or doesn’t know
  how to order it, here are some of the facilities offering the test in the United
  States.* Some will ship the test to you directly.
      Aerodiagnostics: 844-681-9449
      Breath Trackers/QuinTron (hydrogen sulfide testing available in 2021):
  800-542-4448
      SIBO Center Lab, National University of Natural Medicine (NUNM): 503-
  552-1931
      Trio Smart Breath Test (tests for all three gases: hydrogen sulfide,
  methane, and hydrogen): https://www.triosmartbreathtest.com/
      *For the most up-to-date information on how and where to get the test,
  please see https://www.siboinfo.com/testing.html.
Why Testing Is Important
Taking the breath test can seem like a lot of work, and you might be
tempted to skip it entirely. But knowing for certain that you have
SIBO, and what type you have, is a huge step forward in the healing
process. And because the symptoms of SIBO are so general and can
be caused by many conditions, it’s important to be sure what you’re
dealing with so that you don’t overlook something else.
    Doctors often make a diagnosis based on symptoms alone, but Dr.
Siebecker taught me that there are thirty-five to forty other diseases
that could cause the very same symptoms as SIBO but would require
very different treatment. Lactose intolerance, for example, may cause
the same symptoms, but the treatment is taking lactase enzymes.
There have been studies examining how well you can diagnose SIBO
based on symptoms, and the answer is not well at all. One study
compared the symptoms reported by people with small intestine
fungal overgrowth (SIFO) to those reported by people who had SIBO,
and what they found was that the reported symptoms were
indistinguishable. Since the most accurate test for SIFO is to do an
endoscopy, which requires sedation, it would make sense to test for
SIBO first and avoid the more invasive test if possible.
    In addition to SIFO, however, SIBO can also mimic parasites or
something far more serious that needs to be dealt with as quickly as
possible. So if you don’t get to the bottom of what’s bothering you,
you could be wasting your time treating the wrong illness or, worse,
allowing what your real problem is to progress even more.


                            Parasites and SIBO
  No one likes talking about it, but the fact is that parasites exist, and most
  people have them. They’re everywhere—in our food, in our water supply, in
  salad bars—and they don’t recognize borders, according to naturopathic
  physician Dr. Anne Hill. But the good news is that they don’t always make
  you sick because your immune system may fight them off. That said, if
  you’re having gastrointestinal problems and you don’t know why, it would be
  a good idea to get tested for parasites. You may also be totally
  asymptomatic but still have a parasite, so testing is always a good idea.

  Parasite Warning Signs To Look Out For
   Fatigue and insomnia
    Weight gain or loss
    Diarrhea or constipation
    Bloating
    Food sensitivities
    Have pets
    Work in garden/outdoors
    Past food poisoning
    Drink tap or well water
    Swimmer (pools, lakes, ocean, etc.)

       The standard test for parasites is the O&P (ova and parasites) stool test,
  which is notorious for giving false negative results. So, don’t be fooled! Most
  labs don’t send their samples to a parasitologist; they just look at them on a
  slide, and they often don’t know what they’re looking for. Dr. Raphael
  d’Angelo at ParaWellness Research in Aurora, Colorado, is a parasitologist
  who can often find things other labs don’t. You can order a test kit, send your
  specimen to his lab, and receive results along with treatment
  recommendations. Another good test for parasites is the comprehensive
  stool test GI-MAP.
       If you’ve tested positive for SIBO and you have been treated but it keeps
  coming back, you could also have parasites, according to Dr. Ilana
  Gurevich. They can compete with the bacteria (and with you) for
  nourishment because they want to survive. In addition to stealing your food,
  however, parasites also work to shut down your immune system (another of
  their survival mechanisms), so, among other things, you might find that a
  food you did fine with last week triggers a reaction in you this week. In short,
  if you have SIBO and parasites, it may be virtually impossible to cure your
  SIBO until you’ve cleared out the parasites.
       Different types of parasites require different treatment, which is why
  testing, retesting, and working with a knowledgeable practitioner are so
  important.



   I absolutely urge you to do the detective work needed to find your
underlying cause or causes. Remember that SIBO is a condition
caused by something else, and if you don’t know what that something
else is, it is likely only a matter of time until your SIBO relapses.
What if you can’t figure out your underlying cause? It doesn’t mean
you’ll never get better. You can still manage SIBO. However, with
some digging and persistence, you just might be able to unravel the
thread of what is causing your SIBO. I now know my SIBO was
caused by food poisoning and postinfectious IBS.
    With the help of some wonderful doctors and some powerful
lifestyle changes, my symptoms are under control.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                             CHAPTER 2



       Is SIBO Controlling My Weight and Making
                     Me Anxious?

L  et’s do a quick review. The gas in SIBO is caused by bacteria in the
   small intestine consuming carbohydrates and fermenting them
into gas. Different bacteria produce different gas: hydrogen,
methane, or hydrogen sulfide. The different gases are associated with
different symptoms. Hydrogen and hydrogen sulfide both tend to
cause diarrhea and methane is associated with constipation. But
methane gas sometimes has another side effect: weight gain. Studies
suggest that methane can also make you feel anxious and depressed.



IS SIBO AFFECTING MY WEIGHT?
Methane and Weight Gain
Let me explain how methane can contribute to weight gain. The
primary producers of methane are Methanobrevibacter smithii,
which are extremely efficient in breaking down the food you eat and
turning it into calories for your body to absorb and use as fuel. When
you have a normal quantity of the bacteria, they will perform this
function correctly, but when there’s an overgrowth, your body will
absorb more calories than it needs, and you’ll gain weight. This
means that even if you consume the same foods in the same amounts
as someone who does not have an M. smithii overgrowth, you will
absorb more calories. Have you ever wondered why your girlfriend
who eats exactly the same things you do is three pant sizes smaller?
Methane could be a reason.
   Methane, in effect, slows down the large and small intestine so
that once the bacteria break down the foods you eat, you’ll have a
longer time to absorb the calories that are there. I know, because I’ve
experienced it myself, and I can tell you that it was extremely
frustrating, or, actually, quite maddening. And I’m not just talking
about bloating, which is a whole different issue. My weight gain
might not have been noticeable to anyone who didn’t know me well,
but I could feel the difference. All of a sudden, even though I was
eating and exercising exactly the way I always had, nothing I’d been
doing to maintain my weight was working for me anymore. My
clothes didn’t fit, and I didn’t feel comfortable in my own body,
which made me feel completely out of control.
   Dr. Pimentel and his group have shown that in an obese
population of people whose body mass index (BMI) was over thirty,
those with methane dominant SIBO had a BMI that was seven points
higher than those who didn’t have methane. In addition, among the
general population, those who had both methane and hydrogen on
their breath test had a higher BMI than those who had hydrogen
alone. While he hastens to add that these studies do not show cause
and effect, they do show a positive association between methane and
being overweight. I’m excited and hopeful for what this research
could reveal in the future.
   In a follow-up study, Dr. Ruchi Mathur, who is a member of
Pimentel’s group at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles, is
currently looking at the effects that the content of your gut
microbiome can have on the development of obesity and insulin
resistance.


                Is M. smithii Overgrowth Really SIBO?
  In a paper just published as I am writing this book, Dr. Mark Pimentel of
  Cedars-Sinai Medical Center proposes that because M. smithii are not
  actually bacteria but rather archaea, another type of organism that lives in
  the digestive tract, and because these archaea may overgrow in the colon
  as well as the small intestine, SIBO with constipation should not be called
  SIBO at all but rather IMO (intestinal methane overgrowth). The problem, he
  says, is “one of nomenclature. Excessive methane production cannot be
  caused by ‘bacterial’ overgrowth, but is rather due to archaeal overgrowth.
  Therefore, SIBO with methane should not be called SIBO at all, but rather
  IMO (Intestinal Methane Overgrowth).”
     For the moment, however, the medical world has not caught up with Dr.
  Pimentel. So, rather than causing further confusion, I will continue to refer to
  SIBO with constipation or methane dominant SIBO in this book.




SIBO CAN ALSO KEEP YOU MALNOURISHED
According to Dr. Siebecker, there are a lot of reasons for weight loss
if you have SIBO, starting with the fact that if you’re avoiding
fermentable foods to manage your SIBO symptoms, you’re
automatically going to be on a low-carbohydrate diet and, therefore,
you might see the number on the scale going down even if you aren’t
trying to lose weight. In addition, the small intestine is normally
where food is broken down into absorbable nutrients, but, if you
have SIBO, the bacteria may be stealing your food in order to feed
themselves. Or, if you have a lot of diarrhea, that, too, can cause
weight loss because the food is moving so quickly through the
digestive system that there isn’t time for it to be properly absorbed.
And if one of your symptoms is that you’re nauseated all the time,
you probably won’t want to eat very much to begin with. And, of
course, being bloated and having belly pain can really cut down on
your appetite.
    To make matters worse, when people are really busy, they may
skip a meal or two, so they don’t experience a flare-up of symptoms. I
know that when I did that, when I finally got home, I’d overeat
because I was so hungry, and that, of course, would make me feel
even worse.
    It’s a problem when something as basic as eating, which used to
give you pleasure, is no longer pleasant because of the aftermath.
When that happens, you need to make sure that you don’t fall into
unhealthy habits to provide satisfaction, such as excessive shopping,
smoking, reckless gambling, and all of the other potential potholes.
The struggle is real.
    For a while I was so consumed with my own weight gain that I
didn’t really consider what it would be like for someone at the other
end of the spectrum. It wasn’t until a member of the SIBO SOS
community told me about her own problems that I really began to
understand what it would feel like to be too thin. She said she was
devastated and, at one point, she actually thought she was going to
die. Her entire family was worried about her, and everyone simply
seemed to assume that she had an eating disorder. Losing weight as a
result of SIBO can have serious, even life-threatening, consequences
physically, emotionally, and psychologically.



IS SIBO AFFECTING MY BRAIN?
Being sick wears you down; it’s stressful and depressing—especially
if, like so many people with SIBO, your problems are being
misdiagnosed or misunderstood by your doctor.
     If food makes you feel sick, you may start to avoid events where
food is being served. Sometimes simply being around food you know
you can’t eat without feeling awful sucks the joy out of social events.
Explaining why you eat the way you do, or why you’re always in the
bathroom, can make social situations awkward. And if you’re trying
to date or make new friends while struggling with SIBO, I know what
that feels like. These are all very real and legitimate feelings. But
once again, when you’re dealing with SIBO there is much more to it
than that. SIBO also affects hormones, which in turn influence both
mental and gastrointestinal functions.
     There are two modes within your nervous system: the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic. In the simplest of terms, the
sympathetic mode is fight or flight, and the parasympathetic is rest
and digest. (If you have trouble remembering which is which, as I
did, it might help to think of it this way: When you’re stressed, you
need sympathy.) SIBO and IBS can definitely make you feel more
stressed, anxious, and depressed, feelings that lead to your body’s
increasing its production of cortisol, commonly called the “stress
hormone.” When cortisol is elevated, the digestive system effectively
“shuts off” so that you can direct all of your energy to warding off
some kind of perceived danger. But when that danger is mental or
emotional rather than physical (such as a tiger about to pounce),
your cortisol levels may remain chronically elevated, which means
that you remain in a state of heightened awareness and are unable to
go back into rest-and-digest mode. Your stomach acid levels might
go down, digestive enzyme production will decrease, and your
digestion will either speed up or slow down, leading to constipation
or diarrhea as well as being bloated and gassy.
    But there are other ways in which the relationship between SIBO
and your brain is complex. When my first gastroenterologist (Dr.
Run-Three-Miles) prescribed an antidepressant for me, I was beyond
insulted, thinking he was telling me that my symptoms were all in
my head. What I didn’t know at the time is that the majority (as
much as 95 percent) of the mood-influencing neurotransmitter
serotonin is made and stored in the gut. Abnormal levels of serotonin
in the gut have been associated not only with mood disorders but
also with several gastrointestinal problems, including IBS. Healthy
serotonin levels are important for digestive functioning—increased
serotonin levels can cause diarrhea, and decreased levels lead to
constipation. Knowing this, it makes sense that there is a direct
connection on a chemical level between your brain and your gut, so I
guess I really should forgive that long-ago gastroenterologist. But the
lesson to be learned from my experience is, not only does your doctor
need to know what they’re talking about, but they also need to be a
good communicator.
    If he or she isn’t communicating as well or as clearly as you would
like, you need to ask more questions. In fact, you should never be
afraid or embarrassed to question anything you don’t understand.
    In terms of the gut-brain connection, it is equally important to
know that the walls of your digestive system are also home to your
“second brain,” the enteric nervous system (ENS), whose main role,
as Dr. Jay Pasricha explains it, is “controlling digestion, from
swallowing to the release of enzymes that break down food to the
control of blood flow that helps with nutrient absorption to
elimination.” Dr. Pasricha is the director of the Johns Hopkins
Center for Neurogastroenterology, whose research on the enteric
nervous system has garnered international attention. “The enteric
nervous system doesn’t seem capable of thought as we know it, but it
communicates back and forth with our big brain—with profound
results,” he adds.
    Until quite recently it was assumed that your gastrointestinal
problems were caused by your emotional issues—you know, like
“Snap out of it. You’re going to give yourself an ulcer.” But now we
know that it is a two-way street: your mental state can affect your
gut, but your gut can also affect your mental state. And yet, despite
what we’ve discovered about the gut-brain connection, many people
are still being told that whatever is bothering them is all in their
head. Are you depressed? Feeling depressed about feeling
depressed? Your gastrointestinal problems could be the reason.

The Vagus Nerve and Stress
One of the most important connections between your brain and the
enteric nervous system in your gut is the vagus nerve. If your vagus
nerve isn’t functioning properly, it could be contributing significantly
to both your emotional and your gastrointestinal problems. It is the
tenth cranial nerve that runs from your face through your chest and
down to your abdomen, sending signals all along the way. It acts like
a kind of information superhighway between your brain and your
gut.
   In the previous chapter we talked about your migrating motor
complex and the role it plays in sweeping all the leftover debris out of
your small intestine when you’ve finished digesting your food. The
MMC functions when you’re in rest-and-digest mode. Being
chronically stressed actually inhibits the migrating motor complex.
And if you’re a stress eater or someone who turns to food for
comfort, you might be constantly snacking, which doesn’t give your
migrating motor complex the break it needs to sweep leftover food
particles out of your small intestine.
   But even being temporarily stressed, such as when you’re about to
make a speech or take part in a competition, can slow down or
disrupt the digestive process, leading to either diarrhea or
constipation until the stressful situation has passed.
   In fact, stress, in and of itself, is not as simple as it might seem.
Pleasurable situations can be as stressful as unpleasant ones. Getting
married is an obvious example, but going on vacation might be
another. Sometimes eating unfamiliar foods while you are in a new
place can give you diarrhea, or you can experience vacation
constipation. Being away from home can be stressful even if you’re
having fun. I experienced this myself when I was on my honeymoon
and spent ten days in Hawaii with my husband. The long flight, the
change in time zone, and just the excitement of getting married were
enough to wreak havoc with my digestion.
    Stress can also manifest physically, as a tensing of your muscles.
Have you ever been told you’re walking around with your shoulders
next to your ears? That’s stress! And, finally, stress is a two-way
street. If you have ongoing gastrointestinal problems, the persistent
discomfort can add to your stress and anxiety.
    The vagus nerve is key for putting your body into rest-and-digest
mode, so if it isn’t working properly, the result will be that you’ll
remain in fight or flight; you’ll be feeling more stressed and anxious;
you won’t be digesting properly; your stomach won’t empty; and
your MMC won’t kick in, so the bacteria in your small intestine will
have more food to eat and ferment, causing you more SIBO
symptoms.
    In addition, if your vagus nerve isn’t working the way it should,
possibly because you’re under too much stress, you could develop
leaky gut, which means that toxins are able to escape through the
intestinal wall and enter your bloodstream.
    So how do you know whether your vagus nerve is doing what it
should?
    A doctor can test its function by using a cotton swab to “tickle” the
back of your throat, which ought to make you gag. If your gag reflex
isn’t working, there’s a good chance that your vagus nerve isn’t doing
its job. But there are some simple things you can do to stimulate it.
    Because the vagus nerve is connected to your vocal cords and the
muscles at the back of your throat, singing, humming, chanting, and
gargling can activate these muscles and stimulate it, according to Dr.
Datis Kharrazian. Something fun to try is to sing really loudly in the
shower. Some people also gargle before swallowing when they drink
water. There are also several handheld devices you can hold up to
your neck to stimulate the vagus nerve, and I, personally, have found
acupuncture to be incredibly helpful for getting into a
parasympathetic state.



SIBO AND BRAIN FOG
Brain fog is a symptom of SIBO that I have experienced personally
and found incredibly disturbing. I’ll never forget the day when, for a
short period of time, I actually seemed to lose the ability to form
words. I remember the expression on my husband’s face as he saw
what was happening. We were both just plain scared. I was unable to
utter a cohesive sentence and literally slurred my words. There have
been many days when I felt as if my head were swimming and I
wasn’t able to hang on to a thought or stay focused on what I was
doing. Occasional brain fog while appearing on TV was a nightmare.
    Your experience of brain fog may be different from mine. Perhaps
you struggle to recall words, or you forget your to-do list, or maybe
you get in the car, zone out, and forget where you’re going. Some
people forget how to spell a word or do simple math. People forget
names, book or movie titles, or don’t remember what day it is or
what they were about to say. Any one of these things can happen to
any one of us every now and then, but with SIBO it can be more
pervasive and persistent—and therefore more disturbing.
    If you have trouble remembering things or concentrating, even
slurring your words from time to time, you probably wouldn’t
immediately connect those problems with the issues going on in your
gut. I certainly didn’t. But then I learned that too many endotoxins—
the outer layer of bacteria—could be responsible for some of these
feelings of fogginess. Gram-negative bacteria, the most common type
in the world, can be found in your gut, and their cell walls contain
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is an endotoxin and one of the most
potent inflammatory substances known to man. When you have an
overgrowth of bacteria in your small intestine (SIBO), and those
bacteria die (either through treatment or on their own), they release
their LPS. Your body absorbs it, and that triggers an inflammatory
response that can be damaging to your kidneys, your liver, and your
cardiovascular system. It can cause any number of conditions, from
skin issues and joint pain to gut pain, according to microbiologist
Kiran Krishnan.
    And if the LPS makes its way into the brain, it has been shown to
cause cognitive impairment in mice and a range of behaviors,
including anxiety, drowsiness, and general depression, many of
which are considered to be similar to the symptoms of
neurodegenerative disease in humans.
    The trigger for brain fog might also be histamines, which are
created or increased by the overgrowth of bacteria in your small
intestine—that is, SIBO.
                    The SIBO-Histamine Connection
  Histamines are chemicals your immune system creates in response to
  allergens in your body. If you’re allergic to pollen, for example, you’ll
  probably get a stuffy, runny nose. If you have a mosquito bite, your skin will
  swell, turn red, and itch. Those are histamine reactions causing
  inflammation. To counteract them, you might take an antihistamine such as
  Benadryl.
       You can also have a histamine reaction to certain foods, which may
  indicate there’s something going on in your gut, and SIBO may be the
  culprit. If you have a rash or severe brain fog, you could have a histamine
  intolerance related to your SIBO. If you get your SIBO under control,
  chances are you will also gain control of your histamine problem.




THE EFFECTS OF PROBIOTICS—BOOM OR
BUST?
Probiotics are live bacteria that are intended to support and/or
increase your health and well-being. They are also one of the most
controversial topics in the SIBO community. They’re polarizing—not
just philosophically but also in terms of practical experience. Some
people are able to resolve all of their symptoms with probiotics alone.
In fact, I know many people who have had total SIBO remission from
introducing the “right” probiotic.
    Others, however, are totally miserable on probiotics and confused
as to why they seem to be so helpful for someone else. And because
every person’s gut microbiome is unique, there’s no guarantee that
what worked for some other person will work for you.
    Many studies have shown that probiotics can help boost your
mood as well as your cognitive function while lowering levels of
stress and anxiety. However, at least one somewhat controversial
study done by Dr. Satish Rao and his colleagues at the Digestive
Health Center at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta
University, which was published in the journal Clinical and
Translational Gastroenterology, has linked not only brain fog but
also extreme bloating to taking probiotics. Previous research had
already found that too much D-lactic acid in the bloodstream can
temporarily interfere with cognitive functions, which creates brain
fogginess. And, according to Dr. Rao, “probiotic bacteria have the
unique capacity to break down sugar and produce D-lactic acid. So if
you inadvertently colonize your small bowel with probiotic bacteria,
then you have set the stage for potentially developing lactic acidosis
and brain fogginess.” The problem, according to Dr. Rao, is that
probiotics increase the number of bacteria in your gut and, therefore,
increase the amount of D-lactic acid you produce.
   Naturopath, nutritionist, and probiotic expert Dr. Jason
Hawrelak believes there are several mechanisms of action that could
explain how probiotics can benefit SIBO patients. Some probiotic
strains are known to have “selective antibacterial action,” which
means they could potentially help kill some pathogenic bacteria.
Some strains are also known to help stimulate the migrating motor
complex. Others help reduce visceral hypersensitivity, which can
cause the pain SIBO patients feel in their gut. And, finally, some
probiotics can enhance secretory IgA, the major antibody found in
bodily secretion that helps control bacteria populations in the gut.
   Bottom line, if probiotic bacteria affect the bacteria you already
have in your body, they could, ultimately, help control everything
from your weight to your mental health. Clearly, more research
needs to be done, but I believe this is an area of investigation that
holds promise for SIBO sufferers.
   For now, I think the most important takeaway about probiotics is
simply that there is not a one-size-fits-all answer. Some people with
SIBO find them extremely beneficial while they just make others feel
worse. If you want to try probiotics, you’ll have to be prepared to go
through some trial and error. But that can be painful on more than
one level, because good-quality probiotics can be quite expensive! To
hopefully save you some hassle, I have put together a list of
probiotics that are often cited as good for those with SIBO, as well as
some of my “best practices” for choosing a probiotic.


                     Your Probiotics Buying Guide
  What to consider when buying probiotics:
    Check the strength. Look for those that contain at least one billion CFUs
(colony-forming units) per strain. If you choose a probiotic that has multiple
strains, be sure there are at least one billion CFUs of each. Research has
shown that the effective dose of each probiotic is unique, but experts like Dr.
Jason Hawrelak consider one billion CFUs to be a good starting point unless
specific research has demonstrated that a particular strain is effective at a
lower dose.
    Look for an expiration date (and don’t use expired probiotics). The
live bacteria in probiotics will die off over time—for that reason,
manufacturers can only guarantee a certain amount of CFUs for a certain
length of time. All probiotics expire, so don’t buy one without an expiration
date.
    Follow storage guidelines. Not all probiotics require refrigeration, but
those that do need to be kept cool because getting too hot can kill all the
beneficial bacteria. I was intrigued to find that many of the doctors I spoke
with didn’t care about keeping them refrigerated. My advice is to follow the
label for temperature guidelines, and if one is so sensitive that it can’t be at
room temperature for very long, it’s probably not going to live long enough in
your body to make it all the way to your intestines. This is one important
reason why I prefer to buy most probiotics at my health food store rather
than online. If you’re ordering probiotics online, you might want to choose
one that is shelf-stable, such as a spore-based probiotic.
    Look for strains. The best probiotics will list specific strains, not just
species, on the label. This usually looks like a collection of letters and
numbers after the species name. Not all probiotics include this information,
but it’s useful to have because probiotic benefits are strain specific.
    Take it at the right time. There’s a lot of controversy about the right time
to take probiotics, but naturopathic physician Dr. Mona Morstein
recommends taking them with meals for optimal results.

    The following probiotics have been well studied and shown to be useful
for people with IBS and/or SIBO.

  Megaspore: a spore-based probiotic containing very hardy strains that can
  survive the stomach acid and arrive intact in the small intestine.
  Saccharomyces boulardii: a yeast-based probiotic that is ideal for people
  with SIBO, IBS, immune deficiency, travelers’ diarrhea, and more.
  Jarrow Formulas Ideal Bowel Support 229v: ideal for people with IBS,
  abdominal pain, and bloating.
  Visbiome: for people with IBS symptoms, IBD, and other more severe
  intestinal dysbiosis.
  Metagenics UltraFlora Acute Care: for people with functional GI symptoms
  who tend toward constipation and have slow intestinal transit.
    NOW Foods Clinical GI Probiotic: for people with functional GI symptoms
    who tend toward constipation and have slow intestinal transit.
    Align: for IBS patients and other functional gut disorders.
    BioGaia Protectis: for people with methane-type SIBO.
    Doctor’s Best Digestive Health 2 Billion: has been shown to help with
    diarrhea-type symptoms.
    Culturelle Pro-Well Health & Wellness: a well-studied option for people
    with IBS and other digestive symptoms; the Health & Wellness formula
    within the Culturelle line does not contain any prebiotics. Prebiotics feed
    the good bacteria in your gut, but they are problematic for people with
    SIBO because they are also food for the overgrown bacteria in your small
    intestine, which ferments them, creating gas and thus aggravating SIBO
    symptoms.

      The active strain of probiotic in Health & Wellness is Lactobacillus
  rhamnosus GG, and you can find it in most major drugstores. In 2017
  several studies showing its efficacy were published, and L. rhamnosus GG
  is now considered the most researched probiotic in the world.




DEALING WITH GRIEF
SIBO can be overwhelming emotionally and impact many aspects of
your life. It is perfectly normal to grieve the loss of your health and
your routines. Here are some feelings you may be experiencing:

    Body performance grief. The body you’d always counted on is
    now letting you down.
    Lack-of-diagnosis grief. You feel terrible, but no one knows
    what’s wrong with you.
    Diagnosis grief. You have a diagnosis and it sounds really bad.
    Food grief. You are missing all the foods you love that you can’t
    eat and think you can never eat again.
    Lifestyle grief. You know you have to change the habits that bring
    you comfort, but you miss the way you used to live.
    Lack-of-spontaneity grief. You now have to be regimented and
    pay attention to so much all at the same time.
   There may be other issues and changes in your life for which you
are also mourning. Don’t be afraid of your grief; don’t discount it. It
really is real.


                        Look for Online Support
  Many people turn to online SIBO support groups to help work through their
  grief and gain information. I have a SIBO group on Facebook with more than
  fifteen thousand members that has been immensely helpful to so many
  people. If you find that connecting with other people who have SIBO is
  helpful to your healing, join us at
  https://www.facebook.com/groups/SIBOSOSVirtualSummit/.



   As with almost everything related to SIBO and underlying
conditions, there is something of a “chicken or the egg” issue here. At
least one relatively recent study published in the Indian Journal of
Psychological Medicine found that because anxiety and/or
depression are so often associated with IBS (which means, in effect,
with SIBO), gastroenterologists should be screening patients for
these problems so that they can treat them and improve both
outcomes and patients’ quality of life.

How You Can Cope
For all of us living with SIBO, having a mindset for healing is an
important part of the process. But maintaining that positivity isn’t
always easy. The mental and emotional effects of SIBO can be
overwhelming. I know, because I’ve experienced them. When I first
determined to begin my journey to wellness, I became laser-focused
on my health. At the time, I felt bad enough that I was almost forced
to do this just to be able to get through the day. I told myself that it
was a privilege for me to be alive and on this planet, and that, to be
worthy of that privilege, I had to make this commitment to take good
care of myself and put myself first. At least that’s how I felt on the
good days, and even then, it wasn’t always easy for me (and isn’t easy
for most people, in my estimation). It’s a commitment I’ve had to
reaffirm from time to time when I temporarily lost my way and had
to get back on the healing path.
                               Try Not to Panic
  I know. That may be a lot like telling you not to think of pink elephants. You
  have all these symptoms and you don’t know why. You begin to think maybe
  you have cancer. Then your doctor tells you it’s not a big deal, just
  something you’ll have to learn to live with. Really? You keep thinking you’re
  coming close to finding an answer, but the answer never seems to
  materialize. You find something that helps a little, but it isn’t the complete
  answer. The things other people say work for them don’t help you. You
  sometimes wonder if it really is all in your head. At times you feel isolated,
  lonely, and misunderstood, to the point where you go into full-blown panic
  mode. The panic, of course, just makes your symptoms worse, so you panic
  even more. And so on and so on . . .
      If you’ve never felt that way, I’m truly happy for you. If you know exactly
  what I’m talking about, my heart goes out to you, because I’ve been there
  myself.



    Sometimes I’m still overwhelmed with anxiety, and when that
happens, I generally react either by ramping up the number of
treatments I’m trying or by slamming on the brakes and not doing
anything because nothing seems to be working and I don’t know
what to try next. Sometimes the guesswork involved is as difficult to
deal with as the symptoms.
    Very often just naming what’s happening is enough to stop me
from spiraling into panic. And having someone you can talk to, even
just to say “I’m feeling panicked and hopeless right now,” can also
help immensely. The best way I’ve found to keep myself sane is to try
to stay in the moment and check in with myself throughout the day:
“Okay, how’s my mindset? Have I remembered to eat when I was
supposed to? Have I taken some time for yoga or meditation?”
Having a kind of checklist of things I can do to support myself really
helps me stay organized and keeps me on track. Even having a hobby
or interest that has nothing to do with my SIBO gives me something
to focus on when focusing on my gut health starts turning to panic.
    It isn’t always easy, but taking it one step, one treatment at a time,
instead of worrying what might happen ten steps from now,
generally keeps me from throwing myself over the woe-is-me cliff.
And it also helps me know what’s working and what isn’t.
    It’s tempting to want to try everything at once, or to get frustrated
when something doesn’t seem to be working the way you think it
should and moving on to another supplement or another treatment.
The problem with that is, when something goes wrong or triggers a
symptom, you’re going to have a hard time figuring out what it was.
As gut health expert Dr. Michael Ruscio once told me, “It’s tempting
to try to do it all at once and get there quickly. But if you can slow
down a little bit, run these mini-experiments, and listen to your
body, then you can learn.” Slow and steady will win the race.
    But again, if you’re feeling panicked all the time and nothing
seems to help, you really need to see a professional. Just because
SIBO and IBS symptoms aren’t all in your head doesn’t mean that a
good therapist or psychiatrist can’t help you work through the very
real life mental and emotional problems they can cause.


              Unexpected Advice: Declutter to De-stress
  One of the most unexpected and valuable pieces of advice I ever got was to
  clean up, throw out, organize, and fix what was broken. Literally get your
  house in order. As herbalist Summer Bock once explained to me,
  consciously you may not even notice anymore that the board on which you
  hang your keys has been crooked for months because it needs a new
  screw, but subconsciously you do. “Every time you walk by an unfinished
  project it is traumatizing your brain.”
      I’ve found this to be particularly true when it comes to items related to my
  health journey. At one point I had a massive stash of half-used supplements
  and probiotics that I had tried in good faith, but they just didn’t work for me at
  the time. But what I didn’t consciously realize was that every time I looked at
  them I was reminded of failed treatments and money spent on things that
  didn’t help me. I felt discouraged and resentful. It made me feel that even
  though I was trying so hard, nothing was working for me.
      The silliest part was that I knew I would never use the remaining
  capsules. Some of them were even expired! But as bad as I felt about
  keeping them, the thought of throwing them all away felt even worse. The
  day I finally worked up the courage to trash them was incredibly freeing.
      The same rule applies to anything you bought to improve your health
  that didn’t work out. Kitchen appliances, food, books, anything. You don’t
  have to be wasteful: Give it away, donate, sell, or recycle whatever you can.
  Letting those things go creates space—mentally, physically, and spiritually—
  for new ideas and answers to come in.
    And while it is vitally important to put yourself first, one thing
I’ve found to be an essential part of doing that is to maintain as
normal a life as possible, to take the time to be with supportive
friends and loved ones, and, in general, to maintain a balance
between self-involvement and involvement with society. In the
beginning, I found that I became a kind of monk with virtually no
social life at all. But, with time, I came to understand that part of the
healing process is finding a way to be in the world (not isolated from
it) as a person with SIBO. So much of our social life revolves around
food that finding a way to be with friends could be challenging. How
about going for a walk? There are a lot of things you can do that don’t
involve worrying about your digestion.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                               CHAPTER 3



            Your SIBO Medicine Cabinet: Simple
               Remedies for Symptom Relief

I n this chapter, I’ll cover many of the over-the-counter herbs,
  supplements, and medications you can find in drugstores or health
food stores or online, and other strategies you can use at home when
you are experiencing a flare-up or just not feeling great. Keep in
mind that you may need to experiment with these suggestions to find
the ones that work best for you, or the right combination. They are
not meant to be cures or, in most cases, for long-term use.
   Dr. Siebecker has divided these remedies into categories
according to symptom, but you’ll find that some of them show up in
more than one place. That’s because one symptom—bloating, for
example—may be caused by gas, which then creates another
symptom, such as pain from muscle cramps.



BLOATING
Bloating is a symptom that can be ever-present for sufferers of SIBO.
But there are ways to find real relief.

Activated Charcoal
Activated charcoal absorbs gas and is also used for poisoning
because it absorbs toxins. You can buy it in most health food stores
and take two pills every two to three hours, but don’t take them with
food or at the same time as any medications. So that raises the
question: How long should you wait after eating? Like many SIBO
patients, I’ve found that I digest food slowly, so I try to wait at least
two hours (which is what’s generally recommended) to be certain
that I’m taking the charcoal on an empty stomach.
   If you’re curious about how long it takes for food to move through
your system and be eliminated (which is different from how long it
takes you to digest what you eat), look for the black stool that you
may be producing from taking the charcoal and count backward. Or
try eating sesame seeds or poppy seeds. Even people with a perfectly
healthy digestive system will find whole seeds in their stool. A study
done by the Mayo Clinic found that for healthy adults it takes about
forty-eight hours (give or take) for foods we eat to be fully
eliminated.
   The other issue here is that charcoal may cause constipation. One
way to deal with that if it happens is to take magnesium oxide at
night before bed to counteract the constipation. (See more about
magnesium under “Constipation” on this page.) I’d suggest starting
with the dosage recommended on the bottle and increasing it as
necessary until you get the desired results. Don’t worry about taking
too much; the worst thing that could happen would be that you get
diarrhea, but based on what I’ve heard from other SIBO patients,
most people are too cautious with magnesium and, therefore, don’t
take enough.
   I’ve taken the charcoal and experienced miraculous results. One
dose can do the trick.

Atrantil
Atrantil is a type of antioxidant called polyphenols developed by
gastroenterologist Dr. Ken Brown that can help relieve constipation
and reduce bloating caused by methane.

Gas-X
You can take Gas-X as needed. It breaks up the surface tension of the
gas bubbles and turns large bubbles into smaller ones that may pass
more easily.

Iberogast
Iberogast is like an old folk remedy your grandmother might have
told you to take. It is a formulation of nine medicinal herbs in liquid
form that originated in Germany. Dr. Siebecker calls it the German
version of Pepto-Bismol. It smells like licorice and has an herbal
flavor some people love and others hate. Personally, I hate the flavor,
but I find that it provides a lot of relief. It works as a prokinetic,
stimulating motility of the small intestine to help get rid of the gas
that may be trapped there.
    Dr. Siebecker recommends Iberogast again and again because it
helps alleviate not only gas but also many of the other symptoms of
SIBO, including pain, nausea, bloating, constipation, and diarrhea.
You can take it before you eat, while you’re eating, after eating, or at
bedtime. According to Dr. Siebecker, if something’s bothering your
gut, take it (even if you hate the taste, as I do). You can take the
drops directly on your tongue, or you can mix it with water or orange
juice, which is what I do. Some people like to mix it in just a little bit
of liquid and down it like a shot of whiskey, but I prefer to dilute it in
a larger amount of juice to mask the flavor even more.
    The first time I used Iberogast was when Dr. Siebecker and I were
filming our SIBO patient course, the SIBO Recovery Roadmap. I was
feeling unwell that day after traveling, and the Iberogast worked in
minutes to make me feel better. I’ve been a believer ever since.
    You probably won’t find Iberogast at your local drugstore, but it’s
sold in many vitamin and herb stores, and you can also find it online.
I usually buy mine from Amazon. Many people swear by Iberogast
and in my experience it does help. For dosing, follow the directions
on the label. One caveat: Iberogast is not recommended if you’re
using opioids.



PAIN
Pain may not be the first symptom you think of, but for many people
it is the reality of living with SIBO. The pain is almost always caused
by muscle cramps or muscles contracting against the gas. Or it can
also be caused by visceral hypersensitivity.


          Is Visceral Hypersensitivity Increasing Your Pain?
  In medical terms, visceral hypersensitivity (VH) means “decreased
  thresholds of stimuli perception generated from the gastrointestinal tract.” In
  common English it is an increased sensation in your organs—in this case
  specifically the organs of digestion. Someone with SIBO or IBS detects pain
  at a lower level and responds to it more intensely than other people. And
  there is substantial evidence to show that this is a problem commonly
  associated with IBS and SIBO.
       In addition to feelings of pain, this also applies to feelings of being
  bloated. People with VH may feel full and bloated when there is no obvious
  distention of their stomach. Or they might feel a general tenderness or
  soreness in their entire abdomen. I’ve heard some people say that because
  of their VH, they can’t wear any sort of tight or restrictive pants.
       So, what causes that? Once again, it’s complicated. It could be
  inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract, whether due to bacterial
  imbalances, dysbiosis, or SIBO; permeability of the gastrointestinal tract;
  particular infections; or hormonal imbalances. It could also be related to the
  mind-gut connection in a way we don’t completely understand just yet. As a
  result, treatments are also complex and can include anything from pre- and
  probiotics to mind-body medicine, acupuncture, even abdominal massage,
  and, of course, treating the SIBO.
       In the end whatever calms down that hypervigilant nervous system
  allows people to experience less pain and less visceral hypersensitivity. So,
  there’s another very important reason for exploring other problems that may
  be complicating your SIBO.



Kava Kava and Black Cohosh
Kava kava and black cohosh are both herbs that work as muscle
relaxants. They come in both capsule and tincture forms. Tinctures
generally are faster-acting because any time you take a liquid it is
absorbed quicker than a pill or a capsule.
    Often used to relieve stress and anxiety and to promote sleep,
kava kava is well known to alleviate twitching muscles. Black cohosh
is often used to alleviate the symptoms of menopause. But they both
can also do wonders for SIBO pain caused by muscle cramps or
contractions.

Peppermint Oil or Peppermint Tea
Peppermint is a smooth-muscle relaxant and has antibacterial
qualities. Whether you drink it in tea form or take an oil capsule will
depend on where your pain is. According to Dr. Siebecker, if the pain
is high up, such as underneath your ribs, try drinking strong
peppermint tea or take it in tincture form. If the pain is lower down
in your abdomen, at or below your belly button, take enteric-coated
peppermint oil (ECPO) in capsule form. Actually, I often like to take
capsules alongside a glass of peppermint tea to bring relief to my
whole abdomen.
   Dr. Siebecker recommends IBgard, a peppermint oil capsule
formulated for IBS that has little beadlets inside the capsule and is
supposed to act even lower down than the regular capsules. It has
some good studies behind it, and the claim to fame is that it won’t
make you burp.
   One of the problems with peppermint oil is that it can relax the
lower esophageal sphincter between the stomach and the esophagus,
which can worsen acid reflux. So it’s definitely not recommended for
people with acid reflux, but even people without reflux can have a
problem with it. IBgard, because it releases farther down, often
doesn’t do that.



CONSTIPATION
Constipation is another signature symptom of SIBO, and one of the
most uncomfortable.

Osmotic Laxatives
Osmotic laxatives draw water into the large intestine, which makes
the stool softer and creates the urge to move your bowels. These are
different from stimulant laxatives and are generally considered less
habit-forming. In general, they are magnesium-based. In the last
section, I mentioned taking magnesium to counteract the
constipating effects of activated charcoal and how it works.
    There are several different types of magnesium. Glycinate, citrate,
oxide, and L-threonate are just some of the types you might find on
the store shelf. So which one is best for constipation? A lot of people
like magnesium citrate, but Dr. Siebecker recommends magnesium
oxide because it is not absorbed as well by your body, which means
that it works better as a laxative. If you’re looking for the other
benefits of magnesium—such as helping to alleviate anxiety, lower
blood pressure, relieve migraine headaches, and improve
cardiovascular health—you might consider taking another more
absorbable type as well as magnesium oxide for constipation.
   If your constipation is severe and chronic, Dr. Siebecker’s
recommendation is to start with 1,000 mg of magnesium oxide, and
you may need to increase that to 1,200 mg or even 1,500 mg. Again,
as with most things related to SIBO, it depends on the individual.
And you need to take it three nights in a row to give it a chance to do
the job. It’s best to start with a lower dose and work your way up
until you’re having regular bowel movements. If you get diarrhea
you’ve taken too much and need to lower your dose. But I’ve found
that most people err on the side of taking too little and then think it
didn’t work.
   Miralax is also an osmotic laxative that is available in many
drugstores. I prefer magnesium, but some people swear by Miralax.
The medical community seems to really love Miralax, and many
doctors rely on it for colonoscopy prep.


                      Hemorrhoids and Constipation
  Hemorrhoids are at the top of the list of things people don’t want to talk
  about. But if you’re constipated, they can be a real problem, and there are
  solutions.
       According to Dr. Crane Holmes, a naturopathic gastroenterologist and
  primary care physician in Portland, Oregon, one of the primary causes of
  hemorrhoids is straining during bowel movements, so one of the primary
  forms of both prevention and cure is to make elimination easier. He
  describes a hemorrhoid in terms of a balloon. The first time you blow it up,
  it’s fairly stiff and difficult to inflate, but the more pressure you apply, the
  easier it gets.
       He prescribes magnesium to help resolve constipation and, therefore,
  eliminate straining. Basically, he says, the kind of magnesium that works
  best for his patients is very individualized, so he doesn’t recommend any
  specific type. What he does recommend, however, is that you take it in one
  dose at bedtime rather than splitting the dose between morning and
  evening, because he believes doing that is more likely to produce an easier
  bowel movement in the morning.
       Other methods used to reduce the hemorrhoids and alleviate pain range
  from topical treatments such as herbals or the old standby Preparation H to
  old-fashioned sitz baths to more invasive interventions right up to surgical
  removal of the hemorrhoid.
      The main point, however, is that preventing or alleviating constipation is
  the best and surest way to prevent or alleviate hemorrhoids.



Insoluble Fiber
I’m sure you’ve heard that fiber is a good way to combat
constipation, and, in fact, it does work for some people, so it’s worth
a try. Compared to other types of fiber, insoluble fiber is good
because it’s not very fermentable and is, therefore, less likely to be
turned into gas, which could then cause more bloating and other
problems. For some people with SIBO, however, it can actually make
symptoms worse and aggravate more than it helps. If you find that’s
the case for you, just stop taking it. The only way to know is to give it
a try.
    Nut butters, nut flours, peas, and green beans are good sources of
dietary insoluble fiber, or you can get it in the form of a powder such
as Cellulose from NutriCology. But if you don’t respond well to foods
like nuts, you probably won’t feel well taking an insoluble fiber
supplement.
    If you do take a supplement, I really recommend starting with a
small amount and slowly increasing the dose over time. If you
discover that you don’t respond well to it, you’ll be much happier
having taken a smaller dose rather than a large one that leaves you
feeling gassy and bloated for several days!

Iberogast
As we’ve already discussed, Iberogast is very helpful for motility in
both the large and small intestine. It’s not a laxative, but if you’re
using it for other symptoms, you may find it helps constipation, too.

Probiotics
Probiotics are known to help regulate bowel movements, but they
can be tricky for SIBO patients because they very often make
bloating worse, and because, as we’ve already discussed, a lot of
people with SIBO are also histamine intolerant. Since many
probiotics can trigger a histamine response, they might aggravate
somebody with histamine intolerance. That doesn’t mean probiotics
are bad, or even bad for people with SIBO; it just means you need to
be thoughtful about which one you choose.
   First of all, if you do take a supplement form of probiotic, you
should, as I’ve said, get one that doesn’t also contain prebiotics.
   Prebiotics are often mixed with probiotics to help the probiotics
do their job. If you’re not sure, these terms on the label indicate that
your probiotic contains prebiotics:

    FOS (fructo-olgiosaccharide)
    GOS (galacto-olgiosaccharide)
    Inulin
    Dextrin
    Lactulose

   In addition, you need to be sure your probiotics do not contain d-
lactate acid, because people with SIBO often have d-lactate acidosis,
which means that too much of this type of acid is already being
absorbed into the bloodstream, and you don’t want to make the
problem even worse. Look for probiotics that are labeled as being d-
lactic acid free, such as the one made by Custom Probiotics. See
“Your Probiotics Buying Guide” on this page.
   Note that a new study done on the probiotic called Lactobacillus
reuteri, found in the probiotic BioGaia Protectis, has shown that it
lowers methane and helps with bowel movements, and so could help
with constipation. BioGaia Protectis is marketed as a probiotic for
infants, but adults can use it, too. It’s sold as a liquid and you just
dispense the drops on your tongue. I order it from Amazon.
   Also see “Your Probiotics Buying Guide” on this page.


                            Learn How to Poop
  When people are constipated, they often strain to have a bowel movement,
  which, if done incorrectly, can be really dangerous and lead to hemorrhoids
  and fissures. So yes, there is a wrong way and a right way to poop. Most
  people take a deep breath, push while holding their breath, and then exhale.
  (Imagine you’re pushing right now and you’ll see what I mean!) But, as Dr.
  Steven Sandberg-Lewis explains, when you’re pushing to get something
  out, you need to breathe before you can contract your abdominal muscles.
  (You can think of this as pushing out a baby, if that helps you to understand
  the concept.) First take a deep breath, then breathe out as you press down.
  Here’s the key: If you run out of air, stop bearing down and take another
  breath. You’ll find that doing this doesn’t allow you to create as much
  pressure, but that’s exactly the point. You don’t want to build up so much
  pressure that you develop hemorrhoids or a hernia. You want to do things
  effectively but safely.



Water
This might seem obvious, but some people don’t realize just how
dehydrated they really are. Staying hydrated throughout the day is
one of the best ways to ease constipation, but you really need to pay
attention to how much you’re drinking for it to be effective.
    There are many apps you can get on your phone to help you keep
track of your water intake throughout the day. I like Waterlogged,
Daily Water, and WaterMinder. You can also move rubber bands
from your wrist to your water bottle every time you finish a full
quart-size bottle. Having four rubber bands on the bottle at the end
of the day signifying four quarts consumed is a great feeling both
emotionally and physically.
    Drinking water is great, but you don’t want to be drinking out of
plastic water bottles all day. Buy a reusable water bottle instead.
There are several available on Amazon that have a cultlike following
because they are leak-proof, easy to clean, and attractive. I mention
easy to clean because you really need to keep on top of sanitizing the
cap and opening of these bottles. They are breeding grounds for
bacteria and germs when used daily without a serious cleaning.
When I travel, I ask the hotel to run my water bottle through their
dishwasher, or I use my own electric coil to boil water and pour it in
and around the bottle daily.

Potassium
Potassium can help bring water into the large intestine and loosen
the stool a little bit. It’s gentler than some of the other constipation
remedies, but some people respond really well.
   Fresh homemade cucumber, carrot, or tomato juice, bananas, or
avocado, if you can tolerate it, are all good food sources of potassium.
   Other remedies for getting things moving include stool softeners
such as docusate sodium and docusate calcium, coffee enemas, and
glycerin suppositories, the last of which are especially handy to use
when you’re traveling.



DIARRHEA
It may seem counterintuitive, but many of the same things that help
with constipation will generally also work for diarrhea, because, in
effect, they are both working to regulate bowel movements.

Insoluble Fiber
Follow instructions under “Constipation” on this page.

Activated Charcoal
See under “Bloating,” above, and remember that this can cause
constipation, thus counteracting diarrhea.

Over-the-Counter Medications
Imodium

Pepto-Bismol
Taking Pepto-Bismol might make both your tongue and your stool
turn black temporarily. That’s because of the bismuth in the Pepto-
Bismol. It’s perfectly normal and it will pass.

Food Remedies
Cut down on fats, fruits, and vegetables, all of which can increase
diarrhea.



NAUSEA
Poor digestion causes all kinds of unpleasant symptoms including
feeling sick to your stomach much of the time.

Iberogast
Iberogast can help if you’re nauseated because it helps the downward
movement of the gastrointestinal tract and lack of motility.

Ginger
Ginger is famous for being an antinausea herb and often used for
morning sickness in pregnancy.
    Ginger comes in many forms, any of which would be helpful. In
fact, many people have told me that putting a two-inch chunk of
peeled fresh ginger in a glass of hot water with lemon and sipping it
all day helps control nausea.

Acupressure
There is an acupressure point on your inner arm near your wrist
(called point pc-6, which you can find online to locate exactly) that
you can press with your fingers to relieve nausea.



ACID REFLUX
Sometimes called heartburn, acid reflux, which causes a burning
sensation in the upper abdomen, is often associated with SIBO.

Baking Soda
Dissolve ½ teaspoon of baking soda in 4 ounces of water and drink.
It works by neutralizing the acid in your stomach and provides
immediate relief.

Tums
What can I say? They work for occasional use, but if you’re chewing
up several a day, as I was for a while, it’s a sure sign you have some
additional problem that ought to be addressed.

Iberogast
Iberogast is also great for acid reflux!

Herbal Bitters, Hydrochloric Acid Pills, or Apple Cider Vinegar
Low stomach acid (which may be the result of having taken antacids
over a long period of time) can prevent you from breaking down and
absorbing some nutrients. But the reason some people have acid
reflux is because they have too little stomach acid. It’s
counterintuitive, but we need enough acid to strengthen the lower
esophageal sphincter (LES). The LES acts like a kind of trapdoor
between the end of the esophagus and the top of the stomach. When
the stomach is empty it opens to let food in; when the stomach is full,
it closes. But when we have too little stomach acid, the sphincter just
hangs open, allowing what’s in the stomach to back up into the
esophagus.
    There are three different remedies you can take that help
stimulate acid: herbal bitters, hydrochloric acid pills, and apple cider
vinegar.
    The actual taste of the herbal bitters on the tongue helps stimulate
the production of stomach acid, which, in turn, strengthens the
esophageal sphincter and, therefore, reduces acid reflux. In some
cultures, people eat certain seeds at the end of a meal to promote
proper digestion. You can buy the bitters in most liquor and health
food stores.
    Hydrochloric acid (HCl) pills and apple cider vinegar work in the
same way.
    One caveat, however, is that you should start with a very low dose,
because otherwise you might start to produce too much stomach acid
before the sphincter has gotten a chance to close. If even that low
dose causes you pain, you might actually be producing too much
(rather than too little) stomach acid and should be taking an antacid
such as Tums or baking soda instead. As I keep saying, all of this is
really a matter of trial and error, and figuring out what works for
you.
    One other important note: According to Dr. Pimentel, in high
doses, HCl may act as a hydrogen donor, which can then, potentially
be converted into methane gas. If you have high levels of methane,
you’ll want to be aware of this when trying HCl, as there is the
potential that HCl could make you feel worse. Most people find HCl
helps them, and it is definitely worth exploring.

Alginate
I particularly like an unusual treatment for acid reflux involving
alginate, which is a kind of seaweed raft—and no, I’m not making
that up. It’s a substance made from brown algae and calcium
carbonate that mix with stomach acid and form a gel. The gel sits on
top of the food you’ve eaten and prevents reflux. You can buy it as a
supplement in capsule form and take it in place of antacid. It’s more
common in the UK than in the United States.



GENERAL INDIGESTION
SIBO is, after all is said and done, a digestive problem whose
symptoms can flare up at any time in many different ways.
Therefore, it’s a good idea to have an arsenal of products on hand
that are known to alleviate all sorts of indigestion.

Digestive Enzymes
Very often, when people have digestive issues, it’s really not the food
that’s the problem. It’s the person’s inability to break down the food.
Most of the time, giving the body the right tools allows real healing to
take place. Digestive enzymes help you break down your food into
smaller particles so that they’re easier to digest. Your body makes
digestive enzymes, but, like stomach acid, they can be depleted as a
result of stress, a poor diet, or illness. In those cases, taking
supplementary enzymes can help. They are best taken before your
meal. Brands to look for include ProZymes, Vital-Zymes, Holozyme
Digest Platinum, and Digest Gold.

Chewing Gum
Chewing gum can help relieve digestion upset, especially ginger gum.
Dr. Sam Rahbar, cofounder and medical director of Los Angeles
Integrative Gastroenterology and Nutrition, advises chewing gum
after meals to help stimulate the vagus nerve and improve digestion.
Just be careful of what gum you choose, since many artificial
sweeteners can provoke SIBO symptoms. I like the brand Simply
Gum, which is sweetened with a small amount of cane sugar. Some
people also can tolerate gum sweetened with xylitol, since it is used
in such a small amount.

Hydrochloric Acid (HCl), Herbal Bitters, or Apple Cider Vinegar
See under “Acid Reflux” above.
Colostrum
The first milk produced by the mammary glands of mammals after
the birth of a child, colostrum contains immune-enhancing
properties, and recent studies have shown that taking supplements
of bovine colostrum, which is similar to human colostrum, can be
beneficial to gut health and particularly for decreasing leaky gut. I’ve
taken it and found it to be very soothing and very healing, as have
many others. Look for a brand that is lactose-free.

Probiotics
See under “Constipation and Diarrhea” above.



OTHER NATURAL TREATMENTS
Other treatments I’ve found to be helpful include castor oil packs,
acupuncture, acupressure, and reflexology, all of which you can use
to alleviate pain, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, bloating, and acid
reflux, as well as to help with detoxification and relaxing your vagus
nerve.

Castor Oil
Castor oil comes from the castor bean, which is native to India.
Castor oil packs are an ancient treatment still used all the time by
naturopathic and Ayurvedic physicians, and they are extremely
helpful for reducing inflammation and increasing motility. You put
about 2 tablespoons of organic castor oil on a soft cloth and place it
on your abdomen (I wrap plastic around my middle to hold the pack
in place. You need to keep it there for a least an hour or even
overnight. The only problem is that the oil is thick and sticky, and it
can get a bit messy, so you shouldn’t be trying this when you’re
wearing your favorite nightclothes. But don’t let that deter you. The
first few times you will probably think it isn’t working. Give it a few
days. It’s a marvelous detoxifier and helps with the bloat!
    Castor oil can also be taken orally, generally 1 to 3 tablespoons.
Taken that way, it’s a very strong laxative. The packs take a little
longer to work, but they’re gentler, and so I prefer that method. I also
love the oil for removing makeup and as a beauty treatment for my
cuticles and skin.

Acupuncture
Acupuncture uses very fine needles inserted at specific points on the
skin that are believed to be related to particular organs and areas
inside the body. It has been used in traditional Chinese medicine for
more than three thousand years and helps maintain healthy
digestion by modulating the expansion and contraction of muscles in
the GI tract. It can help improve motility and activate the
parasympathetic nervous system so that the vagus nerve functions
more efficiently. It has absolutely helped improve my own overall
health and well-being. Each time I leave an acupuncture session, I
feel hopeful and as if I’d just gotten eight hours of sleep.

Acupressure
Acupressure is based on the same principles as acupuncture but
applies pressure to acupuncture points rather than using needles. At
least one study done in China has shown that it can improve
gastrointestinal motility in women after an abdominal hysterectomy.

Reflexology
Reflexology is a kind of acupressure applied to specific points on the
feet. It is known to help treat both constipation and diarrhea in
people with irritable bowel syndrome (a.k.a. SIBO).
    What I love about all three of these remedies is that they provide
virtually instant relaxation and reduction of anxiety. You can do both
acupressure and reflexology on yourself, wherever and whenever you
want or need the relief.
    Hypnotherapy is another way to alleviate both psychological and
physiological symptoms of IBS, whether or not it is caused by SIBO.
It won’t help you to find or treat the root cause or your SIBO, but it
will make you feel better in the here and now.



TIPS FOR HELPING YOU GET THROUGH THE
DAY
Here are some tips that I’ve found help make my life easier even (or
particularly) in difficult times.

    Take your medicine at the same time every day.
    But of course, if there’s a reason why you can’t take them at the
    same time every day, it’s still better to take them when you can
    than it would be to not take them at all.
    Use timer caps and other reminders. I buy timer caps from
    Amazon for my medications that let me know the last time I
    opened the bottle, and I also set timers on my phone. Both are
    particularly helpful if you’re having brain fog or if you’re just so
    busy that you just forget. Just remember to keep them someplace
    where you’re going to hear them!
    Keep everything together. Keep all your meds and supplements
    together in one place so you don’t have to go searching when you
    need them and you don’t forget something because it isn’t right
    there in front of you.
    Keep a travel stash, too. I also keep mini supplies of all my pills
    by my bed and in my purse just in case I’ve forgotten to take my
    evening meds or I’m rushing out the door and don’t have time to
    take them before I leave home. It’s just a good idea to give
    yourself as many chances as you possibly can to stay on track.
    Try to eat your meals at the same time every day. Doing this will
    stabilize your metabolism and make sure that you’re leaving
    enough time between meals for your migrating motor complex,
    which should be resweeping every ninety minutes when you’re
    fasting between meals, to do its job. Eating even a little bit stops
    the process, which is, incidentally, why snacking between meals
    is not advised if you have SIBO. Even getting ready to eat—
    smelling your food, looking at it, and thinking about how great it
    will be to eat—gets the saliva flowing, which means digestion is
    starting, and that, too, can turn off your MMC. Dr. Mark
    Pimentel suggests waiting four to five hours between meals, just
    in case your small intestine motility isn’t what it should be. I find
    that eating (and taking supplements) at 8 . ., 2 . ., and 8 . .
    is the best schedule for me. You’ll have to figure out what
    schedule is going to work best for you; just remember to leave
    time for that all-important mini-fast between meals. Since
consuming any calories at all turns off the MMC, that means no
cream in your coffee. Some people drink black coffee or tea or
some other sugar-free, zero-calorie drink that won’t interrupt
your MMC.
Go outside. Get out in the sun for a little while each day, but
remember to always use sunscreen!
Meditate—twice a day if possible. There are apps and techniques
to help you get started. Headspace (www.headspace.com) has
award-winning audio meditations, and Self-Realization
Fellowship (www.yogananda-srf.org) is my personal favorite
source of mediations. I highly recommend both of them.
     Meditation is part of my daily practice—and the key word
     here is practice, because it’s not going to be perfect, maybe
     not ever. That’s just life. But, after years of meditating, and
     comparing my life before meditating to my life after, I truly
     believe that meditation is the key to a better life.
Try to get some mild exercise every day. I’m not saying you have
to run three miles, but I’m sure you already know that moving
your body is good for you. It helps regulate your lymphatic
system and improves digestion.
Make time to be with friends. If you book the date in advance, it
will give you something to look forward to.
Make your bathroom a safe haven. You want the rest of your
home to be attractive, so don’t forget the bathroom. Make it a
place you enjoy being. It should be a comfortable temperature.
You might want soft music playing, and it should smell good. The
point is to create a tranquil, comfortable, and private space. Is
your toilet at a comfortable height? If not, you might look into
getting a new toilet installed (this is not as expensive as it may
sound) or installing an elevated toilet seat or a frame over your
existing toilet that elevates your feet off the ground. Are you
worried that people can hear what you’re doing in there? Even a
fan or noise machine could help with that.
     There are many small changes you can make to reduce
     bathroom stress, which will put your nervous system into a
     parasympathetic state, thus also improving your digestion.
     Traditional chemical-based air fresheners can have a
     negative impact on highly sensitive people. So, go easy on the
     artificial scents. There are so many essential oil choices and
          high-quality diffusers. And Poo-Pourri is a brilliant invention
          that covers all kinds of odors and can give your bathroom a
          spa vibe.
     Get enough sleep. Getting good sleep is important because it
     gives your MMC time to do its job properly. Sleep has been really
     getting a lot of attention in the media these days, which makes
     me very happy, because I think preparing for a good night’s sleep
     is one of the most overlooked and easily fixed mistakes or habits
     you can make. What works for me is to be sure the room is dark
     enough, wear an eye mask if necessary, use good sheets, and
     experiment with pillows until you find one you really LOVE.
     Sleep.org also suggests that you keep your room temperature at
     between 60 and 67 degrees Fahrenheit, because your body
     temperature drops slightly to initiate sleep and keeping your
     room in this range helps facilitate that. Also, take the time to
     become aware of the noise level in your room. There are now
     actually apps that allow you to check the decibel level in your
     environment. When I did that, I was absolutely shocked by the
     traffic noise I’ve never consciously noticed before. I started
     wearing earplugs, and after a day or two of getting used to them,
     I slept more soundly than I had in ages.
          If you’ve been told that you snore, you might want to be
          tested for sleep apnea, which not only could be affecting your
          sleep but could actually be putting your life at risk.
          And, finally, you could also take melatonin supplements,
          which not only promote better sleep but also have been
          shown to, at least potentially, alleviate symptoms of IBS
          (and, therefore, presumably SIBO). Melatonin is available in
          many forms, including tablets, liquids, and even gummies. I
          personally like Physica Energetics Melatonin Liposome
          Spray because, by spraying it on your tongue, it is absorbed
          directly into the bloodstream, bypassing the stomach—which
          means it works more quickly, it doesn’t require drinking
          water, and the dosage is easy to adjust.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                              CHAPTER 4



           Change Your Diet to Change Your Life

C   hanging your diet is the fastest way to start feeling relief from
    your SIBO symptoms. Diet alone can’t cure SIBO. I repeat: diet
alone can’t cure SIBO. This is one of the most confusing aspects of
this condition. The only exception is the Elemental Diet, which is a
treatment more than a way of eating (more on that to come). While
some people can manage their symptoms successfully through diet,
in order to actually eradicate the bacteria for good, you also need to
use one of the treatment options I’ll be discussing in Chapter 6. Still,
diet is enormously important. If you change how you eat today, you
will feel better today.
   In addition to being extremely effective, changing your diet is
empowering, because you can do it at home and it gives you a sense
that you have some control over your own health. How, what, when,
and where you eat is an integral part of your lifestyle. So, in addition
to being life-sustaining, food is social and highly emotional, which is
why it can be hard to make changes. It’s important to be patient with
yourself as you work to make shifts mentally, physically, and
logistically.



CARBS ARE FERMENTABLE FOODS
The general rule is that to relieve your symptoms you will need to
limit your intake of carbohydrates, which are fermentable foods.
That is because SIBO bacteria feed on carbs and ferment them into
gas, which not only causes bloating but also triggers many of the
other gastrointestinal problems you’ve been living with for so long.
   Most of us think of carbohydrates as those sugary and starchy
foods—cookies, cakes, ice cream, pasta, and potatoes, to name a few.
But there’s also sugar (lactose) in milk products and in fruits
(fructose). In fact, all vegetables, starchy or not, are carbohydrates,
and there are also some carbs in meat products. What this means is
that carbs are really hard to avoid entirely, and, in fact, you’ll see that
ripe fruits, non-starchy vegetables, and nuts are allowed on the plan I
outline in Chapter 5. And honey is also allowed because it contains
simple sugars that are absorbed quickly before bacteria can ferment
them (clover honey appears to be the type that most people tolerate
best).
   Carbs, in and of themselves, are not “bad.” In fact, the diet I
recommend does not cut out carbs completely. Instead, it shows you
how to limit your intake of fermentable carbs to a quantity you can
tolerate without exacerbating your symptoms. If you feel worse after
a meal—any meal—it is probably because the meal contained more
fermentable carbohydrates than you could tolerate.


               You Don’t Need to Eat the “Perfect” Diet
  The good news is that, because changing your diet is really about alleviating
  symptoms, not curing the disease, you don’t have to worry about the fact
  that if from time to time you eat something that isn’t on the diet, you’ll be
  making your condition worse. In other words, you don’t have to be perfect to
  get results. That said, however, the more compliant you are, the better you’ll
  feel. And because of that, most people find they really don’t want to cheat
  once they realize how good they can feel just by sticking with it.



   In general, you should stick with foods that are low in fermentable
carbohydrates and easy to digest, so that they don’t feed the bacteria
in your small intestine or put an additional burden on your already-
compromised digestive system. This means that they should be low
in FODMAPs. FODMAP stands for fermentable oligo-, di, mono-
saccharides and polyols, which are forms of sugar found in
carbohydrates that feed the bacteria in your small intestine, thus
causing the SIBO symptoms we know and hate: gas, bloating, and
diarrhea or constipation.
   In this book I use the terms “low fermentation” and “low
FODMAP” interchangeably.
   It’s confusing to think of high FODMAP foods like apples, pears,
some legumes, and wheat products as foods you should avoid, since
they are healthy for most people. But try to forget everything you
know about what is healthy and what is unhealthy and approach this
new way of eating with a totally open mind. But, at the same time, do
remember that the foods excluded on this diet are not “bad foods.”
There are simply foods that do or don’t work for you right now. For
example, avocado may upset your stomach now, but that doesn’t
make it bad, and, hopefully, you’ll be able to reintroduce it at some
point.
   Every person and every case of SIBO is different, so no two people
will follow the diet exactly the same way. There will be some foods
you’re allowed to eat but choose not to. Since I’m a vegetarian, all the
recipes in this book are vegetarian, but you can add one of the
proteins listed on this page if you so choose. Some people have
strong reactions to particular foods that others tolerate well, and vice
versa, so even with the excellent guidelines provided in this book,
experimentation with your diet will be key. And, as you get better,
you will want to try reintroducing more foods. The more diverse
foods you are eventually able to eat, the more diverse your gut
microbiome, which is important for overall health.



FOODS THAT HELP REDUCE SIBO SYMPTOMS
Again, everyone is different, but most people seem to do well eating
the right amounts of the foods listed below. If you’re in doubt or need
more help, please reach out to a nutritionist who is knowledgeable
about SIBO. Working with a nutritionist who really knows this
condition could be one of the most valuable things you do during this
journey. I have found that many, if not most, patients don’t make
this investment, but when I finally did, I wondered why I hadn’t done
it sooner. Working with my nutritionist, Kristy Regan, was a game
changer for me. I not only felt better, but I also was much more
satisfied with the food I did eat. I tried things I hadn’t thought I
would like, and I did! One of the big treats was pitaya (dragon fruit).
If you like sweet treats, dragon fruit is delicious and even better than
ice cream, when frozen and served with fresh fruit.
    A nutritionist can help you be certain you’re eating as diverse a
diet as possible. Remaining on a very restricted diet for too long can
damage the diversity of bacteria in your microbiome and, therefore,
leave you vulnerable to other problems. The more diverse your diet,
the more likely it is that you will be able to stick with it because you
won’t be bored. Here are the kinds of meals and foods that are the
foundation of a healing, diverse diet:

      Pureed soup, such as the Delicata Squash Soup, or Shivan’s
   Soothing Soup.
      Food that is well cooked, soft, and preferably pureed (think
   baby food), such as the Pureed Carrots. The point is that you want
   your food prep to do as much of the breaking down as possible to
   start the digestion process for you. We’ll be talking more about
   what those specific foods should be in Chapter 8.
      24-Hour Yogurt, because this process removes the lactose,
   which is fermentable.
      Fruits that are not highly fermentable, such as bananas,
   cantaloupe, grapes, kiwi, oranges, pineapple, and strawberries,
   but not highly fermentable fruits (even though they may be
   otherwise healthy, such as apples, cherries, dried fruit, peaches,
   nectarines, plums, mango, pears, or watermelon). If you have
   trouble digesting fruit, try cooking it, because the cooking starts
   the digestion process for you. I love to caramelize bananas in
   maple syrup or clover honey with a dusting of cinnamon, which
   also satisfies my sweet tooth.
      Smoothie bowls, such as the Acai Smoothie Bowl.
      Clover honey (as well as alfalfa, wildflower, and raspberry)
   because of the ratio of fructose to glucose molecules. According to
   Dr. Siebecker, the ratio of fructose to glucose in these forms of
   honey is 50:50, so they are potentially less reactive for people
   with fructose intolerance than other types of honeys that have a
   higher fructose content. SIBO can cause fructose intolerance, but
   many people with SIBO also have an underlying fructose
   intolerance, so, one way or another, it’s wise to choose foods with
   less fructose.
          Interestingly, the inability to absorb fructose in the
       intestinal tract has been associated with symptoms including
       bloating, flatulence, and loose stools, which are the same
       symptoms SIBO can cause.
       Chocolate—hooray! Just be sure that it’s dark chocolate, which
   is relatively low FODMAP and doesn’t contain any lactose. You
   can eat about 30 grams, which is just over an ounce, or about a
   third of a standard-size chocolate bar.



FOODS THAT CAN TRIGGER SIBO SYMPTOMS
Remember: There is no actual evidence to show that what you eat
actually increases the number of bacteria in your small intestine.
SIBO is not caused by eating fermentable carbohydrates (even in
large quantities). So don’t worry that you’re making your SIBO worse
—or that you gave it to yourself—by eating the wrong foods. All that
eating the wrong foods can and does do is to make your symptoms
worse. You’ll know rather quickly if you’ve eaten something you
shouldn’t have.
    Remember that when you have SIBO your body is basically a
small brewery, so, to put it simply, you want to stay away from foods
that are highly fermentable because they feed the overgrown bacteria
in your gut and are hard to digest. As I’ve already mentioned, some—
in fact many—of these foods are actually very healthy for most
people. Whole grains, beans, and most fruits and veggies are just
some of the foods that are great for healthy microbiomes but tough
on those with SIBO.
    So, what should you avoid to help keep SIBO symptoms under
control?
      Raw foods in general. Cutting out raw salads is probably the
      easiest thing we can do to reduce our symptoms right away.
      Raw vegetables contain a lot of fiber that is difficult to digest;
      cooking them begins to break down that fiber for you. So, stay
      away from the crudités and cook your vegetables very well
      (which is probably exactly the opposite of what you’ve been
      taught). And Dr. Siebecker suggests that you also cook the
   vegetables you put in your green smoothies, assuming you
   make smoothies.
   Whole grains because they have lots of fermentable carbs and
require more work to digest. Again, exactly the opposite of what
healthy-eating advocates generally suggest. In fact, many people
with SIBO find that white bread is the only kind of bread they can
tolerate.


  Autoimmune Disease—the Link between Gluten and SIBO
I can’t really talk about whole grains without talking about gluten. Gluten is
the collective name for a group of proteins found in a variety of cereal grains
but primarily in wheat.
    In people with celiac disease, gluten causes an autoimmune reaction
that damages the lining of the small intestine. Celiac disease (both
undiagnosed and diagnosed) often coexists with SIBO.
    You can be sensitive to gluten without actually having celiac disease.
The medical term for this condition is non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS).
NCGS does not, in and of itself, create long-term damage to the small
intestine, but it does cause an autoimmune inflammatory response that can
create all kinds of problems not only in your gut but in other parts of your
body as well.



    High-fiber foods, which are generally plant-based, including
fruits, vegetables, and grains. The reason is that most fiber is
fermentable and feeds the bacteria you’re trying to starve. Fiber is
indigestible to humans but not to bacteria. So, under normal
circumstances, the undigested fiber goes down into the large
intestine, where the bacteria will digest it, ferment it, and make
good things out of it that help keep us healthy. They also make a
little bit of gas in the process, which we excrete, usually without
even noticing. That’s normal. What’s not normal is that, with
SIBO, the bacteria are in the small intestine, where they don’t
belong. So even though the bacteria are doing what they’re
supposed to do, they’re now harming rather than helping us.
    But I don’t want to tell you to not eat fruits and vegetables.
What you need to do is cook them well to break down the fiber
before you eat them. I eat lots and lots of fruits and veggies every
day. I simply make sure that I stick to those that are lower
FODMAP, cook them (I rarely eat raw veggies), and watch my
portion sizes.


                         A Tip for Bean Lovers
Many types of beans are off-limits if you have SIBO, but a bean-lover foodie
friend gave me this tip for making them less fermentable.
    Add a strip of kombu, which is a kind of seaweed you can buy at any
Asian grocery or in health food stores, to the water when you cook your
beans. It helps break down the raffinose, a kind of sugar in beans that
bacteria love to ferment, so it also reduces the amount of gas the beans will
produce. Just remember to throw out the kombu with the cooking water.
Don’t eat it.
    In addition, soaking dried beans overnight or for up to 24 hours can
make them much more digestible. Beano or Beanzyme (the vegetarian
version) can also help reduce symptoms when you eat beans.



   Fermentable fruits and vegetables, including garlic and onions,
because they contain high levels of FODMAPs, which are
fermentable in the intestine and can, therefore, cause bacteria to
increase.
       Apples, even though you’ve undoubtedly heard all your life
   that an apple a day keeps the doctor away. Apples are not only
   high in fiber, they are also highly fermentable because they
   contain fructose—a double whammy for people with SIBO.
   Dairy products, including milk and milk products, soft cheeses,
and most yogurt (except for 24-Hour Yogurt), because they
contain lactose, which is a type of sugar (that is, a carbohydrate)
that is highly fermentable.
       You could try lactose-free dairy products or even taking a
   lactase pill to help you digest the lactose. In addition, many
   cheeses do not contain any lactose. Read the label; if the sugar
   content is 0, there isn’t any lactose, which is the form of sugar
   found in dairy products. But aged cheeses, even if they don’t
   contain lactose, may contain histamines, which is an entirely
   different issue that could also exacerbate symptoms. And, of
       course, if you’re vegan, you can just ignore this whole section
       because it doesn’t affect you.
       Alcohol, even in moderate amounts, has been associated with
   increased incidence of SIBO. A glass of champagne at a
   celebration is different from a glass of red wine every night to
   unwind. In general, alcohol isn’t good for you. It’s hard on your
   liver; it’s a depressant, slowing down parts of your brain that are
   responsible for cognition and response time; and there is a clear
   relationship between alcoholism and clinical depression. In many
   instances, it appears that the depression led to the alcohol abuse,
   but drinking a lot can also harm your brain and lead to
   depression. In the end, this is a highly personal decision driven by
   many factors aside from how it impacts your health.

   Finally, as I’ve already said, quantity counts. Just because you’ve
made a giant batch of something you really like that isn’t supposed to
exacerbate your symptoms doesn’t mean too much of a good thing
can’t be bad. For example, I like carrots, and eating one or two of
them is fine for me. But a big cooked carrot salad would cause
symptoms for most people with SIBO even though carrots are not
very fermentable.
   In the end, the goal is to eat as many different foods as you can in
portions you can tolerate. Determining what those are, and what
your limits are, will require trial and error. Here comes the pep talk:
you’re going to need curiosity, a sense of adventure, endurance,
creativity, and determination. It’s the understanding that this is a
journey of discovery and you are an explorer in a land that may, at
least at first, seem foreign, and perhaps even hostile to you. Just keep
exploring and keep an open mind; what seems odd and unworkable
to you now will likely become more familiar and friendly going
forward.



ADDITIONAL FOOD TIPS
   Portions matter. Sometimes a little of something—one-eighth of
   an avocado, for example—is okay, but too much will push you
over the edge because it’s too fermentable. Many people think
that if they can tolerate something, and they like it, they have
carte blanche to eat it to their heart’s content. But that simply
isn’t true.
    Don’t worry about what other people are eating. Some people
who have SIBO can eat an egg with no negative effects, some
people can tolerate coconut while others can’t, and the same is
true of other foods.
    Combinations matter. Eating one fermentable food at a meal
could be fine, but eating it in combination with another
fermentable food could be one fermentable too many. As just
about any SIBO sufferer or clinician will tell you, sometimes you
really need to try it to figure out what works for you.
    Keep your ingredients simple. Stay away from foods that
contain garlic (although garlic-infused oil may be okay for you),
are super-spicy or acidic, or that have too many components. Not
only will that make it harder for you to digest, but if you have a
negative reaction it will also make it more difficult to figure out
which food is causing it.
    Space your meals four to five hours apart. You want to give
your stomach time to empty and your migrating motor complex a
chance to sweep out whatever is left in your small intestine after
digestion before you send more down the tube.
    If you’re on the go, take your own food with you. That way
you’ll always have something SIBO-friendly to eat. There are
many reusable lunch boxes and bags you can put in the freezer so
that your food will stay fresh for most of the day after you take it
out. Two brands to look for are PackIt and Yeti. At the risk of
repeating myself, I want to remind you that it’s important to keep
your food fresh in order to avoid food poisoning.
    Strategize when you’re eating out in a restaurant. When you
are eating out, there are a few different factors to consider. If it’s a
celebration, such as a birthday dinner, you may decide it’s worth
it to have your slice of cake and a latte and pay the price the next
day. But if you’ve been feeling really good for a while and don’t
want your symptoms to flare up, you have a few options. Eat
before you go, and if your companion(s) comment that you’re not
eating, you can say you had a late lunch or that your doctor has
told you that you need to be on a really restricted diet. That will
    usually shut people up. The phrase “doctor’s orders” has saved me
    on many occasions.
            Of course, if you’re with good friends who are aware of your
        situation, no explanation may be necessary. But if it’s a
        business lunch or a meal with people you don’t know well,
        what has worked for me is to arrive early and speak with the
        server or host. Explain that you’re on a very restrictive diet and
        would like to order in advance so that you don’t become the
        focus of the conversation at the table. Most restaurants will be
        happy to work with you, so long as you explain the problem
        politely.
        Be sure that you’re hydrated. Drink at least eight cups of good
    filtered or bottled water a day. Water helps to move things
    through your system and get them out of your gut. Some people
    are actually constipated simply because they’re dehydrated. And if
    you have diarrhea, you may also be dehydrated because of all the
    water you’ve been losing in your stool.

   Luckily, eating a small amount of anything is not likely to have a
significant impact on how you feel. That’s a very important thing to
remember. And experimenting is not going to make your SIBO
worse; it may make you feel worse for a little while. But if by
experimenting you find out that something you thought you couldn’t
eat is actually great, you’ll be expanding your dietary repertoire—and
that is a great gut feeling. Plus—the more diverse your diet is, the
better it is for maintaining the variety of good bacteria in your large
intestine, where you need them to help you maintain optimum
health.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                               CHAPTER 5



                          The 21-Day Plan

N   ow that we’ve covered the basics of what foods help alleviate
    symptoms and what foods you should avoid, let’s dive into the 21-
Day plan. The nutrition plan I outline in this chapter is based on the
SIBO Specific Food Guide (SSFG) (also called the SIBO Diet or SIBO
Specific Diet). This food guide was developed by Dr. Siebecker and is
based on her clinical experience treating SIBO. It combines the
recommendations of the Specific Carbohydrate Diet and the low
FODMAP diet and is low fermentable. I love this eating guide
because it delivers great results, but it’s also flexible. You can actually
stick to it and live your life.



OTHER NUTRITIONAL APPROACHES TO SIBO
The SIBO Specific Food Guide has worked best for me, but there are
other nutrition plans for SIBO that you may have heard of or that
you are experimenting with. Some are more restrictive than others,
but all of these diets work for the same reason: They reduce the
amount of fermentable carbohydrates you’re eating, which, in turn,
gives the overgrown bacteria in your gut less to eat! If you are
following a different type of eating plan, you can still use the recipes
in Chapter 8—just consult the label I’ve included with each recipe to
see whether it is compatible with your particular plan. Here is an
overview of the other recommended diets:
    The low FODMAP diet was created at Monash University in
Melbourne, Australia, to help people with IBD and IBS, and has
since been adopted by many practitioners for treating SIBO. The diet
includes a restrictive list of high FODMAP (fermentable) foods
paired with low FODMAP alternatives. The goal is not to completely
eliminate FODMAPs (which would probably be nearly impossible)
but to reduce them to a level that allows you to manage your
symptoms. After an initial all-low FODMAP restriction period,
experimentation of moderate and high FODMAP foods follows to
find what is individually tolerated. Staying on the low FODMAP–
only diet over the long term can actually disrupt the number and
diversity of good bacteria in your microbiome, which is why it’s
important to not get stuck in the initial restrictive phase.
    The Cedars-Sinai Low Fermentation Diet (CSD) was designed by
gastroenterologists at Cedars-Sinai Hospital, as the name would
suggest. The diet is low fiber and emphasizes the importance of
fasting between meals so that the MMC can function properly. Foods
like white rice, white bread, and cookies are generally allowed, and
vegetables are less restricted than on the low FODMAP diet. Lactose-
free dairy (such as lactose-free milk and hard cheeses) are also
allowed. If you’re feeling overwhelmed by making substantial
changes to your eating habits, this diet is a great way to start because
it is easy to follow (even when eating out) and is very helpful for
many people.
    The Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) is one of the oldest
therapeutic diets, so some of the foods, such as dry curd cottage
cheese, may sound strange or be difficult to find. It is a grain-free,
low-sugar, low-lactose diet originally created for the management of
celiac disease that is now often used for the treatment of IBS and
SIBO. Because it focuses on foods that are easy to digest but doesn’t
consider FODMAPs, it’s generally recommended for people with
more moderate cases of SIBO who can tolerate a wider variety of
vegetables than those who are more reactive or have more
complicated cases.
    The GAPS (gut and psychology syndrome) diet was initially
designed for autistic patients as part of a whole treatment plan. It is a
variation of the SCD and works very well for people with mood or
brain disorders who also have GI disorders, which is not uncommon.
But because it is not a SIBO diet, you might need to modify it a bit to
eliminate high fermentable FODMAP foods such as avocado and
onion. Like the SCD, however, it limits carbohydrate intake and
focuses on foods that are easy to digest, so it is likely to be helpful for
people with SIBO. It emphasizes animal products, so it is hard to
follow if you are vegetarian.
    The SIBO Bi-Phasic Diet is Dr. Siebecker’s SIBO Specific Food
Guide, broken into two phases by Dr. Nirala Jacobi, with some
variations. The first phase is intended to reduce symptoms, and the
second phase is done in conjunction with SIBO treatment (herbal
antibiotics).


                         Eating Disorders and SIBO
  We can’t talk about following any diet for SIBO without bringing up eating
  disorders. This isn’t just an issue for those who have suffered from
  disordered eating in the past. In fact, the restriction of a SIBO diet,
  necessary though it may be, can actually lead to the development of an
  eating disorder.
      According to Dr. Siebecker, “When you’re on a diet that’s so restricted
  both in scope and in portion size, it could trigger an eating disorder, which is
  why we try to treat the SIBO and then expand the diet as soon as possible.
  The goal is to expand the diet as much as we can as soon as we can. More
  diversity leads to a healthier microbiome, more nutrients, more minerals,
  and, ultimately, better health overall. In addition, since food is one of our
  major sources of pleasure, the more foods you can eat without feeling sick,
  the happier you will be.”



    Sometimes you need to treat yourself and have a small amount of
something you love. If you don’t allow yourself to do that, you might
just give up on the diet altogether because you can’t bear the idea of
never tasting that food ever again for the rest of your life. Remember,
food doesn’t cause SIBO, and occasionally eating foods that trigger
your symptoms won’t make your SIBO worse, so it’s okay to “let
loose” sometimes (as long as you’re prepared for the short-term
flare-up of symptoms that may follow). I find it helpful to plan my
treats in advance, because it gives me something to look forward to
and also helps to put an “end time” on the treat so it doesn’t turn into
an entire weekend of eating all the foods that make me feel bad.
    With that in mind, the SIBO Specific Food Guide is forgiving, and,
unlike many other diets, it’s easy for vegetarians to follow.
                          Legal and Illegal Foods
  The Specific Carbohydrate Diet uses the terms “legal” and “illegal” to
  differentiate foods you can eat from those you shouldn’t. While that sounds
  pretty straightforward, it is too simplistic.
       For instance, many foods are “moderate FODMAP,” which means they
  contain some fermentable carbohydrates. In large quantities, these foods
  can cause symptoms (as can even low FODMAP foods when eaten in large
  quantities). But, on the other hand, high FODMAP foods can often be
  tolerated in small amounts. All of which means that no food should be
  considered totally illegal, and that kind of black-and-white thinking can make
  following a SIBO diet more difficult and limiting than it needs to be.
       That’s why I much prefer Dr. Siebecker’s color-coding system, which
  progresses from green to red, with green foods being the least fermentable
  and red food the most.
       I know I can tolerate most green foods, small quantities of most yellow
  and orange foods, and even some red foods. No foods are totally off-limits,
  which, for me, is extremely reassuring.



   In the Appendix you will find a version of Dr. Siebecker’s SIBO
Specific Food Guide. To suit my particular vegetarian needs, I simply
moved eggs up into the dairy category and listed other proteins at the
end, which you can add if you are not a vegetarian. Besides being
vegetarian (and delicious), my recipes include starches like white
rice, which isn’t listed in SSFG, and potato, which is in the red
category. However, other SIBO diets include starchy foods—many
SIBO patients tolerate them, including me—and they are important
for vegetarians.
   Dr. Siebecker’s instructions include:

    Start with low (green) and moderate (yellow) fermentable foods.
    When you start the diet, and for at least the first week, cook, peel,
    deseed, and puree all vegetables and fruits.
    Limit moderate (yellow) fermentable foods to one per meal and
    separate your meals by at least four to five hours.
    The quantities listed are for adult-size portions. When no
    quantity is given, it means either that the food can be consumed
    in unlimited quantities or that no specific amount was
    recommended in the low FODMAP diet at the time the food
    guide was created in 2014. Note that larger quantities of a
    particular food may be considered moderate or highly
    fermentable even when a smaller quantity is low fermentable.
    Tailor the diet to your personal preferences and tolerance level.
    Trust your body’s reactions to particular foods. Just because it is
    listed in the food guide as red doesn’t mean the food will be a
    problem for you.
    Tolerance levels change over time, so retry foods to which you’ve
    previously had a negative reaction.
    Wait until you are feeling better to introduce celery root,
    rutabagas, cruciferous vegetables, beans, seeds, nuts (including
    nut flours, butters, and milks), coffee, alcohol, raw vegetables,
    salads, and some raw fruit.
    Remember that the SSFG is a starting point you can use to help
    you figure out what to try, not a do-or-die list of foods you must
    avoid forever.



THE PLAN
The key to your success is going to be preparation. For those who are
used to simply grabbing something on the fly, this will be a huge
lifestyle change. It won’t be easy, so keep your eye on the prize or the
light at the end of the tunnel, to quote a couple of clichés. It’s going
to require both a mindset and a logistical change because you’re
going to have to be sure that you always have on hand the food you
need/want to eat.

Before You Begin
Take an inventory of your kitchen. Do you have a good supply of
green and yellow foods on hand? If not, stock up! If you’ve got a lot
of red or orange foods, you don’t need to panic. You might want to
donate or give away anything perishable, but you’ll probably be able
to reintroduce some or most of these foods in the future, so there’s
no reason to get rid of foods that will keep for a while on your pantry
shelf. Look online for companies that are making low FODMAP
foods. And see the Recipe Grocery List so that you can shop for the
ingredients you’ll need for the meal plans.
   Some of your old favorites may no longer work for you, but if you
get creative, you can find substitutions that will make you feel just as
satisfied! In fact, you may even discover some new favorites. Just
because you’re eating fewer foods doesn’t mean you need to eat less.
You may just need to be more diligent about getting enough calories
—especially protein—each day.
   Make sure you have a good supply of SIBO-friendly staples—
including garlic-free seasonings, condiments, and salad dressings as
well as fresh or frozen fruit for smoothies and your favorite
sweeteners such as clover honey or stevia.
   One thing you should not be doing is going hungry. Have you ever
been hangry—so hungry that you’re angry? I have, and I didn’t even
realize until after I’d eaten something that I’d really just been
hungry.


                  Apps to Help You Use What You Have
  If, like me, you’ve ever stood in front of your refrigerator or pantry trying to
  decide what to do with the ingredients you have on hand, using an app that
  figures it out for you can be just what you need. Simply input the foods you
  have available and receive a recipe or selection of recipes that use those
  ingredients. A few options include

    Fridgetotable.com
    Chopchopfamily.org
    Myfridgefood.com



   Also, make sure you have all the proper cooking utensils. See the
Kitchen Tools List.

To Keep You on Track
Here are some strategies for the weeks ahead to keep you going.

    Keep a food diary. I know, it’s annoying, but it does work. It
    helps you learn which foods trigger your symptom and which
    ones don’t. For example, I found that I could eat about 4
    tablespoons of avocado, which meant that I actually had to
measure the amount. I couldn’t just think, okay, you can eat half
an avocado, because they come in different sizes.
     Rebecca Coomes, a SIBO survivor and now a SIBO health
     coach, says that once she started keeping a “food and mood”
     diary, she was able to listen to her body and appreciate the
     clues it was giving her rather than blaming it for what was
     and wasn’t working for her. For example, she’d say, “Thanks,
     body. So much for those symptoms. That bloating was great
     because now I know I just can’t tolerate pumpkin.”
     Write down what you intend to eat and then write down what
     you actually did eat. If they’re not the same, think about why.
     A friend came over? You were too busy?
     Also write down the quantities of what you ate and how you
     felt afterward.
If you hate keeping a food diary, use your phone to take a picture
of everything you eat instead. The photos will be conveniently
date- and time-stamped (and if you don’t eat the whole meal,
take a picture of what is left over, too). Then you can flip back
through photos and see exactly when and what you ate without
having to write anything down. A photo won’t give you as much
data as tracking with pen and paper everything you eat, but it’s a
great alternative if typical food diaries simply don’t work for you.
Plan your meals in advance. Several days or a week ahead would
be ideal, but if you can’t do that, even a day in advance would be
helpful. I know that many people suggest planning meals—and
even cooking—for a week at a time, but Dr. Sheila Dean taught
me that planning twenty-four hours in advance is more realistic
for most of her patients. Just plan as far in advance as is doable
for your lifestyle. And, of course, don’t panic if plans change. You
don’t want to be so rigid about your meal planning that you can’t
enjoy a spontaneous lunch date with a friend. This diet is meant
to give you back your life, not take it away from you.
Keep a supply of your favorite fresh herbs. Herbs can add flavor
to your food without triggering your symptoms.
Make big batches of foods that are freezable. If you freeze single
servings, you’ll always have something that’s nourishing and that
you like to defrost when you don’t have time to cook. There are
many cool ice-cube-type trays now available that are modified
just for this purpose.
    Invest in a set of reusable food storage containers in a variety of
    sizes. They are much safer and more eco-friendly than plastic
    wrap and bags. I’ve found that square and rectangular-shaped
    containers fit into my fridge and freezer far better.
    Look for “green” foods in the SIBO Specific Food Guide. These
    are the foods that are less likely to trigger your symptoms, but
    don’t be stubborn. If you eat a green food and are instantly
    bloated and gassy, you probably don’t tolerate that food just yet.
    Remove it from your diet for now and try it again later on.
    Start with purees. At first, when your symptoms are very bad,
    peel, deseed, cook, and puree all vegetables and fruits except for
    very soft ones like ripe bananas and avocado. Over time, you’ll be
    able to eat them whole, gently cooked, and eventually even raw
    again.
    Find a reliable way to track your water intake. Remember to stay
    hydrated.
    Don’t let yourself get too hungry. If you are hungry, you’ll have a
    hard time chewing well and eating slowly, and you may even
    wind up saying “What the hell” and going off the plan. Low blood
    sugar is not your friend!



YOUR WEEK-BY-WEEK PLAN AND EXPECTED
RESULTS
You’ll see that some recipes have items in italic. That means it’s a
simple recipe I assume you already know how to make, such as a
grilled cheese sandwich.
    In addition, you will find that some recipes include foods that are
not on the SSFG diet but are, nevertheless, SIBO-friendly, meaning
that they don’t contain any ingredients that are high in fermentable
carbohydrates.
    You shouldn’t go hungry while you’re following this guide. Feel
free to increase portion sizes to your tolerance, or add more recipes
from those listed in Chapter 8 to round out any of the meals. If
tolerated, gluten-free bread drizzled with garlic-infused olive oil is
one of my favorite additions to any meal.
                              Where’s the Beef?
  I am a vegetarian, so all of the recipes in this book are vegetarian. If you do
  eat meat, you can add a serving taken from the list on this page to any of
  the recipes.
       My favorite vegetarian and SIBO-friendly proteins include firm tofu
  (silken tofu is higher in FODMAPs), eggs, nut butters, and beans in small
  servings. As with any food suggested in this book, only eat these if they
  work for you. Everyone is unique, and foods that don’t bother me might be a
  problem for you.



Before You Begin Week 1
This is the most restrictive week of your diet as you figure out what
works for you and get your symptoms under control. Eliminate as
many carbohydrates, as much fiber, and as many triggering foods as
you possibly can. Steam and/or sauté all your fruits and veggies, or
make soups. Your food needs to be predigested as much as possible.
    It’s also important to immediately start keeping track of what
foods you can and can’t tolerate. I made a master list of all the foods
I liked and could eat (and a separate list of foods I couldn’t tolerate).
When I was stumped trying to decide what to eat, I could turn to my
“good” list for ideas. And, moving forward, I also used my “bad” list
to help reintroduce foods I initially wasn’t able to tolerate. It was
always exciting to move foods from no to yes. Most people aren’t
reintroducing foods in Week 1, but it is vital to start this list now and
keep it up.
    It’s possible that during Week 1 you might not be able to tolerate
all of the recipes I’m giving you here. You might want or need to keep
it even simpler, so that if something doesn’t agree with you, you’ll
have an easier time figuring out what food caused the problem.
When a dish has lots of different foods in it, it can be very difficult to
determine which one is triggering your symptoms. Once you’ve
established your list of well-tolerated foods, you can get back to
being creative in the kitchen!
    You might actually notice a huge difference in the very first week
as you cut out the foods that have been triggering your symptoms.
You will probably notice that you’re less bloated—which feels good!
But even if you don’t notice a difference right away, don’t be
discouraged. You always notice when you’re gassy and you bloat, but
you may not immediately notice when you don’t bloat. So keeping a
food diary should also be a reminder to self-assess each day, think
about how you feel and whether you feel better or worse.
   A word of caution: Week 1 might not go as smoothly as you’d like.
Just keep at it. It will be worth it.

Your Week 1 To-Do List
In addition to following the meal plan, help support your healing in
Week 1 by following the guidance below.

       Stock Up on Symptom-Relief Medication and Supplements
           Since Week 1 is all about getting your symptoms under
       control, you should check back through the lists I’ve provided
       in Chapter 3 and stock up on symptomatic relief supplies.
           Another thing to consider in Week 1 is adding a
       multivitamin to make sure all of your nutrition bases are
       covered.
       Take a Breath Test
           If you haven’t already taken or scheduled a breath test, now
       is the time to do it. Make an appointment and see if your
       doctor wants you to complete the test in the office or if you can
       do it at home. Remember that you’ll need about twenty-four
       hours to complete your prep, so take that into account when
       you’re scheduling the test.


                               Remember . . .
   There’s a really good chance—up to 78 percent—that if you have IBS, it was
   caused by SIBO. Once you’ve confirmed that, you can eradicate the
   bacteria—as I’ll be explaining in Chapter 6—and take back your life, waving
   goodbye in the rearview mirror to IBS.



       Keep Track
         Keep track of the circumstances in which you felt better or
       worse after a meal and see if you can link the foods you ate to
      your mood at the time or to a specific life event. Doing that will
      help you make better choices moving forward.
         Remember to also keep up that list of questions that
      hopefully you have already started. There will surely be issues
      that come up as you start your new diet that you’ll want your
      doctor to answer. And when you get those answers, make sure
      you write them down. Gathering data is an important part of
      this journey.
      Set Your Intention
         This week is all about setting the intention to heal your
      body. Make a commitment to yourself to make the necessary
      changes, but don’t be too hard on yourself if or when you make
      a mistake (which we all do, especially when we’re trying
      something new), and above all, avoid holding a pity party. You
      have accomplished the most important part: getting started.
      Let the excitement and enthusiasm you’re feeling carry you
      through the adversities of the first week.
         This is a great time to clean out any meds and supplements
      that didn’t work or have long since expired.



                               WEEK 1
Monday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with clover honey and low FODMAP fruit
and nuts
   Lunch: Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich and Pureed Carrots
   Dinner: Crispy Accordion Potatoes, Green Goddess Dressing,
steamed vegetable, and protein of choice

Tuesday
Breakfast: Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water and Easy Veggie
Scramble (with one or two vegetables only)
   Lunch: White Rice with leftover steamed vegetable and protein of
choice
   Dinner: Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder and
protein of choice
Wednesday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with clover honey and banana
   Lunch: Easy Mashed Potatoes with Pureed Carrots and protein of
choice (leftovers from Tuesday)
   Dinner: Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites, Shivan’s Soothing Soup, and
protein of choice

Thursday
Breakfast: Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding and scrambled eggs with
one vegetable
   Lunch: Angel Eggs with Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots
   Dinner: Easy Pesto Rice with Tapenade and Berry Compote

Friday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with clover honey and banana
    Lunch: White Rice with scrambled eggs and vegetables
    Dinner: Angel Eggs and Pureed Carrots

Saturday
Breakfast: Leftover Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding and scrambled
eggs with one vegetable
   Lunch: Easy Mashed Potatoes with Pureed Carrots and protein of
choice
   Dinner: Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich and Pureed Carrots

Sunday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with Berry Compote and clover honey
   Lunch: Leftover Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich and Pureed
Carrots
   Dinner: Sautéed vegetables topped with Herb Compound Butter
and protein of choice

Before You Begin Week 2
You may start to notice a bigger difference in the second week, but
then you may begin to doubt your own perceptions—am I really
noticing a difference, or is it all in my head? Trust your gut (literally)!
   When you start to feel better you may think you can start eating
things you know you shouldn’t eat. Don’t get too far ahead of
yourself, but it’s okay to start to reintroduce a few ingredients at this
stage on a trial basis.
   The key to reintroducing ingredients is to do it one at a time,
much as you would do on an allergy elimination diet, and give
yourself time before testing another new ingredient so that you can
track how your body reacts to each one individually. I have heard of
people being able to tell within a few minutes to a few hours how
they react to a new food, but if you have very slow motility, a window
of up to seventy-two hours can be helpful.

Your Week 2 To-Do List
As you start to feel the positive effects of changing your diet, take this
opportunity to look deeper into ways you can enhance your health.

   Revisit Your Supplements
         A few questions to ask yourself: Which ones have you been
     taking? Have you noticed any difference in how you’re feeling?
     If they seem to be working, that’s great. Stick with them. But if
     you don’t feel any better, and certainly if you feel worse, go
     back to my list of suggestions and see if there are any you
     haven’t tried. If so, now is probably a good time to give them a
     try.
     Consider Your Health History
         Now that you’ve made it through the first week, it’s an
     excellent time to start deciphering your underlying cause. Go
     back as far as your memory will allow and write down any
     health-related events you can recall. Obviously, anything that
     stands out, such as a broken bone or a hospitalization, belongs
     on your list, but don’t overlook more seemingly insignificant
     incidents, such as food poisoning or a fall that left a bump on
     your head. Also, write down if and when you remember taking
     any prescription medications such as opioids or antibiotics.
         If you suspect postinfectious IBS/SIBO caused by food
     poisoning, ask your doctor about ordering the ibs-smart blood
     test. Finding your underlying cause will help determine the
     best way for you to move forward with your healing, and, in my
      experience, give you a great sense of peace. You’ll no longer be
      wondering “why me?” or “will it always be this way?” You’ll
      know why and you’ll have a plan to change things!
          To give you some support and reinforcement, this might
      also be a good time to consider joining a SIBO group online,
      like my group at
      https://www.facebook.com/groups/SIBOSOSVirtualSummit.
      Knowing that there are others out there going through the
      same thing can be incredibly helpful.



                              WEEK 2
Monday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with Berry Compote
   Lunch: Grilled Cheese Sandwich (not SSFG) with Tapenade
   Dinner: Roasted Artichoke Hearts, Cheesy Baked Carrot Fries
with Ranch Dressing, and protein of choice

Tuesday
Breakfast: Easy Veggie Scramble
   Lunch: Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich and Pureed Carrots
   Dinner: Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites with protein of choice, Shivan’s
Soothing Soup, and leftover Berry Compote

Wednesday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with clover honey and banana
   Lunch: Leftover Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites with protein of choice
   Dinner: Cheesy Veggie Frittata

Thursday
Breakfast: Leftover Cheesy Veggie Frittata
   Lunch: Easy Mashed Potatoes with Pureed Carrots and protein of
choice
   Dinner: Spaghetti Squash Lasagna

Friday
Breakfast: Pureed Carrots with cinnamon and scrambled eggs
   Lunch: Leftover Spaghetti Squash Lasagna
   Dinner: Mexican Baked Potato

Saturday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with Berry Compote
   Lunch: Leftover Mexican Baked Potato
   Dinner: Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder,
steamed vegetable of choice, and protein of choice

Sunday
Breakfast: Hard-boiled egg and Pureed Carrots with cinnamon
   Lunch: White Rice, steamed vegetable, and protein of choice
   Dinner: Crispy Accordion Potatoes, steamed vegetable, and
protein of choice

Before You Begin Week 3
You know what to eat, it is starting to become a habit, and you are
feeling noticeably better. Everything from your mood to your sleep
pattern is stabilizing and changing for the better. By the third week
most people really do start to notice a pattern of improvement that is
steadily building on itself—less bloating, less pain from the bloating,
more regular bowel habits. You still have bacteria in your small
intestine; you still have SIBO, but you’re have fewer symptoms.
   You should have a pretty good routine going, so you can start to
plan your meals for the following week based on the recipes you now
know work best for you.

Your Week 3 To-Do List
Below are some other things you can do to support your health
during Week 3.

   Explore Further Treatment
        Hopefully you’ve taken the breath test and have your
     results, so, if you haven’t already started treatment, now is the
     time to decide which way to go.
     Let Yourself Feel Good
         This week is all about feeling good again! Hopefully, you’re
     already seeing big improvements in your health, and you know
     it’s only going to get better from here on out.
         The only “mental trap” to beware of this week is doing too
     much too soon. You might get overexcited and start
     reintroducing foods and cause a flare-up of your symptoms.
     That’s normal. Don’t beat yourself up about it; just get back to
     doing what works, and you’ll be feeling good again in no time.
         Not feeling great yet? Don’t be discouraged, as this is still
     only the beginning of your journey.
         Week 3 is about setting yourself up for long-term health,
     happiness, and comfort.



                              WEEK 3
Monday
Breakfast: Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites
   Lunch: Broccoli Cheddar Soup
   Dinner: Rainbow Veggie Spring Rolls with Almond Dipping Sauce
and clover honey, Honey Macaroons

Tuesday
Breakfast: Earl Grey Latte and Acai Smoothie Bowl
   Lunch: Leftover Broccoli Cheddar Soup
   Dinner: Shepherd’s Pie

Wednesday
Breakfast: Get Going Green Juice and Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites
   Lunch: Leftover Shepherd’s Pie
   Dinner: Leftover Rainbow Veggie Spring Rolls with Almond
Dipping Sauce and Zesty Lime Pie

Thursday
Breakfast: Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie with added protein
powder of choice
   Lunch: Leftover Rainbow Veggie Spring Rolls with Almond
Dipping Sauce
    Dinner: Pineapple Fried Rice

Friday
Breakfast: Honey Lavender Latte and Blueberry-Lemon Muffin
    Lunch: Leftover Pineapple Fried Rice
    Dinner: Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip with SIBO-friendly
crackers, protein of choice, and Ginger Almond Cookies

Saturday
Breakfast: 24-Hour Yogurt with Grain-Free Granola and clover
honey
   Lunch: Delicata Squash Soup with Citrus and Roasted Fennel
Salad
   Dinner: Buddha Bowl with Green Goddess Dressing

Sunday
Breakfast: Earl Grey Latte and Acai Smoothie Bowl
   Lunch: Delicata Squash Soup with Citrus and Roasted Fennel
Salad (leftovers from Saturday)
   Dinner: Easy Pesto Rice with vegetables and protein of choice,
and Chocolate-Covered Bananas

And What about the Weeks That Follow?
You can continue on this diet while also continuing to reintroduce
more foods as your gut heals and your microbiome improves.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                               CHAPTER 6



                 How to Destroy the Bacteria

W    e’ve already talked about some relatively simple remedies you
     can use—in addition to changing your diet—for symptom relief.
But, while diet and symptomatic relief can help you feel better in the
short term, they won’t get rid of the overgrown bacteria in your small
intestine.
   But if you can actually get rid of the bacteria entirely, you will take
care of most of those symptoms, including bloating, once and for all.
This chapter is dedicated to the treatments that can kill the
overgrowth and actually get rid of SIBO.
   There are three kinds of treatment you can use to do that:
pharmaceutical antibiotics, herbal antibiotics, and the elemental
diet.
   When you’re starting treatment, you need to know that it will
probably be a marathon, not a sprint. Most SIBO patients need more
than one course of treatment or even one kind of treatment. What
works for someone else may not work for you. Having that mindset
from the start will help you go the distance.



PHARMACEUTICAL ANTIBIOTICS
There are three main types of antibiotics used to treat SIBO:
rifaximin (brand name Xifaxan), neomycin, and metronidazole
(a.k.a. Flagyl). Many people don’t want to take antibiotics. Most of us
have heard that we all take too many of them too often, but there are
good reasons to try these particular antibiotics for treating SIBO. The
treatment for hydrogen is rifaximin alone, while the treatment for
methane is rifaximin along with either neomycin or metronidazole.
                      New Treatment on the Horizon
  In an exciting new development as of this writing, Dr. Mark Pimentel
  continues to be hopeful that a modified-release form of lovastatin called
  SYN-010, a medication initially used to lower cholesterol, could inhibit the
  production of methane and thus help with the constipation type of SIBO.



Rifaximin
As Dr. Siebecker explains, rifaximin is a very special antibiotic.
Rifaximin does not have the same side effects as a typical antibiotic.
Unlike other antibiotics, it is not absorbed into the bloodstream.
Therefore, it is less likely than typical antibiotics to create side effects
such as urinary tract infections, and studies have shown that it does
not cause yeast overgrowth. This is important to know, because
pharmaceutical antibiotics are famous for indiscriminately
destroying everything in our microbiome, particularly in the large
intestine where all the good bacteria live. Rifaximin, on the contrary,
does not do that, and, in fact, has been shown to increase two types
of good bacteria, lactobacilli and bifidus, in the large intestine. And,
finally, it acts as an anti-inflammatory by shutting down what is
known as the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) inflammatory pathway,
a protein complex that plays a key role in regulating the immune
response to infection.
    So, in addition to being nontoxic and safe, rifaximin actually
increases good bacteria in the large intestine and reduces
inflammation. A benchmark clinical trial conducted in 2010 found
that those people treated with rifaximin alone had a 62 percent
success rate in eradicating SIBO.
    The icing on the cake is that very few people appear to be allergic
to rifaximin, and most do not develop a resistance to it, so that it will
continue to work if multiple courses of treatment are necessary—as
they often are with SIBO.

Neomycin and Metronidazole
Neomycin and metronidazole are both typical antibiotics. They can
cause unpleasant side effects and impact the microbiome, and yet a
lot of gastroenterologists use them for the methane type of SIBO.
According to Dr. Siebecker, neomycin is similar to rifaximin in that
it, too, stays in the intestines rather than being absorbed into the
bloodstream. But, unlike rifaximin, it works on the large intestine as
well as the small intestine, and it does decrease beneficial bacteria in
a way that typical antibiotics would do. A rare side effect of
intravenous neomycin, but not oral pills, is hearing loss. If you
already have hearing loss, talk to your doctor about this before
starting neomycin.
     Generally, a course of antibiotics takes about two weeks, and it
can take up to six rounds of treatment to reduce your bacteria load to
a negative test result.
     The standard dosing of rifaximin for hydrogen-type SIBO is 1,650
mg per day (that is, 550 mg taken three times a day) for fourteen
days.
     The dosing for methane-type SIBO is 1,650 mg of rifaximin (550
mg taken three times a day) for fourteen days PLUS 1,000 mg of
neomycin (500 mg taken two times a day) for fourteen days.
     For rifaximin and metronidazole, the dose is 1,650 mg rifaximin
(550 mg taken three times daily) for fourteen days PLUS 750 mg
metronidazole (250 mg taken three times a day) for fourteen days.
     I know antibiotics can be controversial, but when used correctly
they are one of the most effective treatments for SIBO.

Herbal Antibiotics (Antimicrobials)
Herbal antibiotics are another treatment option and have been
shown to be as effective as pharmaceuticals, if not more effective.
They generally take longer to do the job. They usually take about a
month to work instead of the average two-week course of
pharmaceutical antibiotics.
   Herbal antibiotics are often the first choice for most naturopathic
physicians, and, personally, I love the idea of herbs as a treatment—
particularly if your symptoms are mild enough for you to tolerate the
four-week treatment period and/or you prefer doing things
naturally. I often prefer natural remedies, and I tried killing off my
bacterial overgrowth with herbs. But while I did feel better, because
my case of SIBO is complicated, the herbal antibiotics didn’t work for
me as quickly or efficiently as I had hoped they would.
   Other than the fact that they’re natural, two great things about
herbs are that they don’t require a prescription, and if you don’t have
insurance, they are generally less expensive than pharmaceutical
antibiotics. I should point out, however, that because you can buy
them over the counter, you might be tempted to start self-treating
without first taking the breath test to confirm that you really have
SIBO. Not a good idea! As I’ve already mentioned and will be
discussing in detail in Chapter 7, SIBO can have many underlying
causes and/or co-conditions and can also present in the same way as
other illnesses, some of which might actually require an entirely
different kind of treatment. And for those same reasons, you should
retest after you’ve been taking the herbs for thirty days to be sure
your bacterial load is decreasing.
    According to Dr. Siebecker, the four herbs most often used to
treat SIBO are:

   Neem (a.k.a. Indian lilac), which is a member of the mahogany
   family
   Herbs that contain berberine (found in goldenseal, Oregon
   grape, barberry, coptis, and philodendron and available in
   combination in supplement form), which activates an enzyme in
   the body that plays a major role in regulating metabolism
   Oregano or oregano oil
   Stabilized allicin extract, which comes from garlic and is
   particularly helpful for the methane type of SIBO. (Garlic itself is
   off-limits on most SIBO diets because it contains FOS—
   fructooligosaccharides—which are fermentable in the intestine
   and can, therefore, cause bacterial fermentation, but allicin
   extract does not.)

   These herbs are generally taken in combination, since,
individually, they perform different functions.
   Dr. Siebecker recommends taking two of these herbs in
combination and at the following doses for a period of four weeks per
course—with the understanding that more than one course of
treatment may be necessary.

   Neem (she recommends Neem Plus from Ayush Herbs because it
   contains triphala, a traditional Ayurvedic formula that seems to
   help with small intestinal motility: 6 pills a day, either 2 pills,
   three times daily or 3 pills twice a day
   Berberine: 5 grams or 5,000 mg per day (this is more than most
   people take, and winds up being more than 10 pills, so check the
   milligram listings carefully. Many round down to 9 pills/day or
   just under 5,000 mg): 3 pills three times a day
   Oregano (she recommends Biotics Research A.D.P., which comes
   in tablet form and is less irritating to the digestive tract than the
   oil in capsule form): 2 pills three times a day
   For methane: allicin (she recommends Allimed, also sold as
   Allimax Pro, as the formula with the highest potency of 450 mg
   allicin/pill): 6 pills a day, either 2 pills three times a day or 3 pills
   twice a day. This is used for methane SIBO along with any one of
   the other three herbs. Use link https://www.allimax.us/?
   AffId=40 and code SIBOSOS for a special discount.

   As with determining what foods you should or shouldn’t eat,
deciding on the combination of herbs that will be right for you can
take some trial and error. If you’re someone who tends to react to
almost everything you put in your mouth, maybe start with a low
dose. If you have a bad reaction, stop taking one of your herbs and
see what happens. If you’re still having a problem, stop taking that
one and go back to the other—eventually (probably sooner rather
than later) you’ll figure it out.
   Another option is using a combination herb supplement.
Gastroenterologist at The Johns Hopkins Hospital Dr. Gerard Mullin
and colleagues studied two regimens: Biotics Research FC-Cidal plus
Biotics Research Dysbiocide, 2 caps twice a day for four weeks for
each formula, or Metagenics Candibactin-AR with Metagenics
Candibactin-BR, 2 caps twice a day for four weeks for each formula.
They found that the herbal treatment was as effective as
pharmaceutical antibiotics. However, as Dr. Siebecker points out,
methane-SIBO patients will need to add allicin to the above regimes,
and also the berberine dose in Candibactin-BR is fairly low and may
need to be increased.
   As with any condition requiring antibiotics—herbal or
pharmaceutical—finding the right match and the right dose are the
keys to success.
The Elemental Diet (a.k.a. Starve the Suckers)
The elemental diet is a liquid medical food diet that consists of a
specific mixture of predigested nutrients we need in order to live and
comes either in a premixed liquid form or in powder form—in which
case you need to mix it with water. The way it works is that these
predigested nutrients are absorbed so quickly and so high up in the
digestive tract that you get the same number of calories you would if
you were eating regular food, but the bacteria in your small intestine
are not being fed and, therefore, they starve to death. Other “shakes,”
meal replacements, and protein powders are not the same as the
elemental diet (although you can use an elemental diet serving as a
meal replacement, even if you’re not following the elemental diet).
    This is certainly the most difficult treatment method to follow, but
it is also the fastest and, in many cases, it can decrease severe gas
levels in a single two-week course. Some doctors will tell you it
shouldn’t be the first form of treatment, but others say it’s been
proven to work relatively quickly and effectively in most cases, so you
might just decide to go for it before you’ve even tried one of the other
two treatments.
    One downside is that, because we associate eating so strongly
with socializing, pleasure, and satisfaction, you might feel that, at
least on an emotional level, you’re starving to death along with the
bacteria. But, on the other hand, some people report feeling so great
on the diet that they say they wish they could stay on it forever.
    Luckily, the elemental diet has come a long way in the very recent
past. The original, unflavored version studied by Dr. Pimentel for
SIBO, called Vivonex Plus, is made by Nestlé and doesn’t taste good,
but there are now several flavored formulas available that make it
much more palatable.


                 Elemental Diet Formulas with Flavor
    Elemental Heal (whey-free) from Functional Medicine Formulations
    https://store.drruscio.com/products/elemental-heal
    Elemental Nutrition (Vanilla) and Keto-Elemental Nutrition from Vita Aid
  Professional Therapeutics (available only through a practitioner)
    https://www.vitaaid.com/main/product.asp?ID=1160
    https://www.vitaaid.com/usa/main/product.asp?ID=1160
      Physicians’ Elemental Diet and Physicians’ Elemental Diet Dextrose-Free
   from Integrative Therapeutics (available only through a practitioner)
      https://www.integrativepro.com/Products/Gastrointestinal/Physicians-
   Elemental-Diet



   Or, you can also make your own. For a “recipe,” see
https://www.siboinfo.com/elemental-formula.html.
   And really, if you know what the light is at the end of the tunnel,
wouldn’t you be willing to do almost anything for just two weeks—
especially if it’s going to give you the rest of your life back?
   One potential problem I should mention is that the formula is
necessarily high in simple carbohydrates because “elemental” means
that the carbohydrate is broken down to its simplest form, which is
glucose or maltodextrin depending on the formula. If you’re
someone who is susceptible to yeast, it could create some
overgrowth. If you have a history of yeast, or certainly if you have an
active yeast infection, you might want to talk to your doctor about
taking some kind of antifungal, such as nystatin, which stays in the
intestinal tract, along with the elemental formula.
   Having changed your diet and completed at least one of the
treatments for eliminating the overgrowth of bacteria in your small
intestine, you should be well on your way to reclaiming your health
and your life. If your case is complicated, as mine is, you may still be
experiencing some symptoms or find yourself relapsing. But fear not:
In the next chapter you’ll learn what you can do to maintain or
recover the progress you’ve already made.

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                             CHAPTER 7



             Retesting, Relapsing, Re-treating

O   kay, you’ve been through your treatment protocol, you’ve been
    following the SIBO Specific Food Guide for at least three weeks,
and, hopefully, you’re experiencing relief from your symptoms.
   What do you do now? The answer is, it depends, as is shown in
the chart below.
   I created this chart based on previous charts designed by Drs.
Siebecker and Sandberg-Lewis, which itself is a variation of Dr.
Pimentel’s IBS-SIBO chart.



ARE YOU FEELING 90 PERCENT BETTER?
If you’ve completed treatment and are feeling 90 percent better or
more, you don’t need to retest. Woohoo! You can happily assume
that your SIBO is resolved and you’re now into a new phase:
preventing relapse.
    Relapse with SIBO is common, and if you do relapse, it’s normal—
but there are steps you can take starting immediately that will help
you prevent it.
    First, you should start a prokinetic right away. If you’ve been
taking them all along, don’t stop now. If you haven’t been taking
them, now’s the time to start.
    For most people, SIBO is initially caused by a deficient migrating
motor complex. Once you’ve gone through treatment and the
bacteria have been cleared, or even partially cleared, you need to
prevent them from coming back, and having a functional MMC is
key. Prokinetics keep the MMC sweeping and help prevent other
problems, such as acid reflux, that would allow what’s been swept
out to come back up.
   Dr. Pimentel recommends taking prokinetics for three months
after finishing treatment and then stopping on a trial basis to see
how things go. For many people, that will be enough time, but some
people with chronic cases will probably need to keep taking them
permanently.
   To revisit Dr. Siebecker’s list of reliable prokinetics, see this page.
   Meal spacing is another way to support a healthy MMC and
prevent relapse. The MMC runs on a ninety-minute cycle. If no
calories (food or beverage) enter your body for ninety minutes, the
MMC will do a sweep. Therefore, most doctors recommend three to
four hours between meals to make sure the MMC has time to do its
work. If you hear your stomach growling between meals, that’s a
good sign. It means the MMC is doing a sweep!
Symptom Relief: this page
Dr. Siebecker’s Sibospeciﬁc Food Guide: this page
Allicin, Neem & Oregano: this page
Rifamixin & Neomycin: this page
Management: this page
This ﬂow chart is based on the Siebecker and Sandberg-Lewis Algorithm and is a
variation of the Cedars-Sinai Protocol.
 1. Pimentel M. A New IBS Solution: Bacteria—The Missing Link in Treating
    Irritable Bowel Syndrome. 1st ed. (Sherman Oaks, CA: Health Point Press,
    2006), 90.
 2. Siebecker A. Sandberg-Lewis. Small Intestine Bacterial Overgrowth: Often-
    Ignored Cause of Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Townsend Lett. (Feb/Mar 2013):
    85–91. http://www.townsendletter.com/FebMarch2013/ibs0213.html



IF YOU’RE NOT FEELING 90 PERCENT BETTER
(YET)
If you’ve completed your first treatment (herbal antibiotics,
antibiotics, or the elemental diet) and you’re still not feeling at least
90 percent better than you did before changing your diet and starting
treatment, if you would like to be able to expand your diet, or if you
still have unresolved health issues, Drs. Siebecker and Sandberg-
Lewis recommend you retest to see whether or not the SIBO is gone.
The retesting should be done within two weeks of completing
treatment because two-thirds of the people who have SIBO will
relapse, many will relapse within two weeks, and the point of
retesting is to see how effective your treatment was before you
relapsed.
    It could be that your first round of treatment didn’t do the job.
Maybe it didn’t work at all; maybe you saw only a slight
improvement; or maybe you felt even worse. Personally, I was really
let down when I finished my first round of rifaximin and still didn’t
feel well. Weren’t the antibiotics supposed to cure me? I’d started the
treatment with so much hope and excitement, and now I was really
disappointed and felt somehow cheated. What was going on? I didn’t
know at the time that most of us will need more than one round of
treatment.
    If you’ve done the treatment and retested and found that your gas
levels have gone down, congratulations, the treatment is working!
You may still be positive for SIBO, but if your breath test numbers
have come down even a little, you should consider your treatment a
success; keep going! But if you initially tested positive for SIBO, were
treated, and after your treatment protocol your gas levels didn’t
change, it might be time to try a different SIBO treatment. For
example, if you were taking conventional antibiotics, perhaps you
should try taking herbs. Or maybe it’s time to move on to something
more aggressive, such as the elemental diet.
    The point is that if you don’t feel at least 90 percent better, you
need to get retested within two weeks because your SIBO might be
gone even though you don’t actually feel that much better, meaning
something else was causing the symptoms. Or, you might have
improved even though you don’t feel much better yet. Or, if you
haven’t improved, you need to find out why. What you shouldn’t do
is panic. Just because your first treatment didn’t work well doesn’t
mean you will feel this way forever.



WHEN THE BACTERIA GO INTO HIDING
We tend to think of bacteria as individual organisms circulating in
your intestinal tract, but they also form groups, and then hide out in
what are called biofilms so that medications can’t reach them.
    The bacteria attach themselves to the lining of your intestine and
secrete a mucous-like substance that forms a protective layer over
them, making it difficult for the antibiotics you’re taking to reach
their intended target. I think of biofilms as an impenetrable tent the
bacteria build to live inside.
    We all have bacteria and we all have biofilms—it’s normal. Things
become problematic when we need to fight off bacterial infections. If
you’re taking antibiotics, it’s normal for bacteria to want to reinforce
their biofilm, because they want to survive as much as you want
them to go away. So it can become an all-out war. According to the
National Institutes of Health, almost 80 percent of human bacterial
infections are associated with biofilms.
    If you’ve been taking medication and you’re still not getting
better, you can try “biofilm busters.” Once you are able to bust
through the biofilm, your antibiotic medication should begin to work
as it should and you will begin to see those formerly elusive results
you’ve been looking for. Oregano, thyme, rosemary, volatile spices,
curcumin, capsaicin, and olive leaf can help break up biofilms. And if
those still don’t do the trick, you can move on to more powerful
treatments, which include:

    Interfase Plus by Klaire Labs
    Biofilm Phase-2 Advanced by Priority One

   However, many doctors report mixed results using antibiofilm
agents, which is why there isn’t a standard SIBO recommended
regimen. Personally, I think this is an area of great promise for the
future.



YOU MAY BE BETTER AND STILL FEEL BAD
If your gas level was very high, it might need to come down
significantly before your symptoms are relieved. Therefore, retesting
within two weeks will not only let you know where you are, it will
also tell you how far you’ve come, and that can be very encouraging.
Not retesting is one of the biggest mistakes Dr. Siebecker sees, and
she has tirelessly campaigned to shine a light on this blind spot.
    On the breath test, a rise in hydrogen of more than 20 parts per
million (of breath) or a rise in methane of more than 10 parts per
million in ninety minutes is considered positive for SIBO, so if your
initial level was extremely high, you may have come down a lot but
still be positive for SIBO, even though you’ve actually made
phenomenal progress. Remember, multiple rounds of treatment are
usually needed, not just one (or two).
    If you’re at the end of your elemental diet treatment, you should
test immediately after finishing. The elemental diet is done for two
weeks, after which you need to fast overnight (for twelve hours) and
retest on day fifteen, according to Dr. Pimentel. That’s because there
are some people who won’t test negative after two weeks, but if those
people stay on the diet for an additional week, they have a better
chance to eradicate SIBO. Since the test results are almost
immediate, they can continue the diet without losing any time.
Otherwise they might have to start all over again, and no one wants
to stay on the elemental diet any longer than is absolutely necessary.
Be sure to plan in advance so that you have the kit on hand and
communicate with the lab that you’ll need the results within twenty-
four hours.
    Another important reason to retest is that SIBO is often
associated with other conditions and diseases. If you don’t feel
better, or if you relapse quickly, it may be because you have some
other, associated condition that needs to be checked out and dealt
with. Some people (like me) have underlying causes that put them at
greater risk of relapse. It isn’t a life sentence, but it does require
more maintenance.
    According to Dr. Pimentel, “If you respond to rifaximin or an
herbal antibiotic or some antibiotic and you’re doing great, then
getting to the bottom of it isn’t so important, because, as I say, for 80
percent of patients it’s the migrating motor complex. It’s if the
patient is relapsing really quickly that it’s important to get to the
bottom of it . . . if you took an antibiotic and you got better and it
came back in a week, then you have to start thinking about things
that are causing the SIBO.”
    If you do test negative once you’ve completed your treatment, but
you still have symptoms, you need to start looking for other
problems. According to Dr. Siebecker, SIBO is common in people
who have autoimmune diseases such as IBD, scleroderma, celiac
disease, and Hashimoto’s hypothyroidism, although the exact nature
of these associations isn’t fully known. However, because increased
intestinal permeability (that is, leaky gut)—along with a genetic
susceptibility and exposure to a trigger (such as Cdt-B with food
poisoning)—is one of the three underlying causes of autoimmunity,
“SIBO, with its high likelihood of generating leaky gut, will need to
be corrected for both prevention and treatment of autoimmunity,”
she says.
    What about if you still test positive but are feeling better? One of
the tricky things about SIBO is that the amount of bacteria you have
doesn’t always correlate with the severity of your symptoms. That
means your gas levels could be very high on a test, but you feel good,
while another person could have only slightly elevated levels and
horrible symptoms. For some people, a negative SIBO breath test is
the ultimate goal, and they are willing to continue treatment until
they get there. Other people are happy to feel 90 percent better, even
if they still have some level of SIBO. That leads many people to
assume that if they are feeling good, they don’t need to retest, but it’s
not that black and white. It’s also possible that you don’t have SIBO
anymore, and symptoms are caused by something else. That’s why it
is always a good idea to retest after treatment.
UNDERLYING CAUSES AND ASSOCIATED
DISEASES
Other diseases associated with SIBO include Crohn’s disease,
hypothyroid, and diabetes, all of which are very common. Ehlers-
Danlos, a group of connective tissue disorders, is not as rare as one
might think. In fact, 60 percent of those with constipation-type IBS
and 35 percent of those with diarrhea-type IBS have Ehlers-Danlos.
And then there’s Parkinson’s; scleroderma; POTS (postural
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome), a condition that affects
circulation; and injuries such as traumatic brain injury (which could
actually result from nothing more than falling off your bicycle),
traumatic spinal injury, or whiplash, any of which can be caused by a
car accident.
   It might seem crazy to think that an injury to your head could
somehow cause bacterial overgrowth, but it actually makes sense
when you consider that your brain and your gut are in direct
communication with each other through the vagus nerve.
   The vagus nerve controls the function of the migrating motor
complex, and when you experience a traumatic brain injury, proper
communication between the vagus nerve and the migrating motor
complex can be impacted, which can create a situation in which SIBO
can develop.
   Other associated conditions to be aware of, according to Dr.
Siebecker:

   Inadequate bile acids
   Low stomach acid
   Low pancreatic enzymes
   Stress (which can impact motility)
   Diverticulitis
   Liver disease
   Restless leg syndrome
   Chronic renal failure
   Post-chemotherapy
   Rheumatoid arthritis
   Interstitial cystitis
                                What Is POTS?
      You may never have heard of it, but that doesn’t mean you might not
      have it. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome occurs when your
      vagus nerve isn’t functioning properly and therefore your sympathetic
      nervous system is working in overdrive. This not only impacts your
      digestion but also affects your ability to move from a reclining to a
      standing position. Your heart rate shoots up and you get light-headed
      but you don’t faint. If you experience that phenomenon on a regular
      basis, you may have POTS, which could also be causing your SIBO
      symptoms because you’re not in “rest and digest” mode.
          The important thing for you to consider is that if you have symptoms
      of POTS, the POTS may be an underlying cause of your SIBO. A
      doctor can do a simple test by taking your pulse when you’re lying down
      and again when you stand up to confirm that you have the condition.



    A good way to think of it is that SIBO is really a symptom that has
its own symptoms and issues. SIBO doesn’t happen on its own. This
is important to understand. Imagine that you had a faucet leaking
water onto the floor. SIBO is like the water on the floor. Yes, you
need to clean it up, but if you don’t also fix the plumbing, you’ll be
cleaning water off the floor forever.


        SIBO and Lyme Disease—the Gut-Brain Connection
  Commonly associated with tick bites, Lyme disease is technically an
  infection caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi (and, no, you New
  Yorkers, that’s not a place you go on a shopping spree), which can cause
  both gastrointestinal and neurological problems similar to SIBO. In other
  words, Lyme can either cause or contribute to a person’s SIBO symptoms. If
  your SIBO is cleared but your symptoms persist, it would, therefore, be a
  good idea to get tested for Lyme disease. Lyme Disease expert Dr. Tom
  Messinger recommends the at-home Lyme test from DNA Connexions.



   You need to keep looking for that underlying cause, because if you
treat the bacterial overgrowth without treating whatever interfered
with the proper functioning of the MMC or caused your motility
issues in the first place, you’re not going to be able to treat SIBO
successfully. Some underlying causes can be resolved and some will
need to be managed for life. But at least you will know what to do in
order to manage your SIBO. And your life can still be 100 percent
better with a managed chronic condition than with one that is
unmanaged.



FINDING THE ROOT CAUSE
Sometimes the cause of SIBO is obvious and sometimes it isn’t. In
many cases, you have SIBO but you also have other health problems
that are probably not what caused your SIBO. Both fibromyalgia and
rosacea patients, for example, have been shown to have higher than
normal levels of hydrogen gas (and in the case of rosacea, sometimes
also methane) on the lactulose breath test. Fibromyalgia is a
condition causing widespread musculoskeletal pain as well as
fatigue, brain fog, and sleep issues. Rosacea is a condition in which
the skin of the face becomes red and blotchy. In the fibromyalgia
patients, a higher gas level correlated with a higher pain level, and in
another study, fibromyalgia sufferers were shown to have an
increased prevalence of leaky gut. When the rosacea patients were
treated with antibiotics for either the hydrogen or methane gas, the
vast majority saw a significant decrease or complete remission of
symptoms. It seems clear that there is a relationship between these
two conditions and SIBO. But exactly what that relationship is
remains unknown—at least for the moment.
    At a certain point, however, it really doesn’t matter which came
first or how your health issues are related. You’ve got them both and
you have to address them in order to have the best outcome you can.


                       Beauty from the Inside Out
       In addition to rosacea, psoriasis, eczema, and acne often accompany
  SIBO. For years these conditions have been treated mainly with antibiotic
  creams, but, in fact, while topical treatments do help, these skin problems
  often have deeper causes, and to clear them up once and for all, you need
  to find and treat the underlying cause.
OTHER HEALTH ISSUES THAT MIMIC SIBO
In addition to being associated with other health problems, SIBO
symptoms can also mimic a whole host of other diseases. Some of
them may be less of a problem, while others can be serious. Bloating,
for example, is a symptom of ovarian cancer as well as a temporary
response to eating beans or cruciferous vegetables, but don’t start
jumping to conclusions or catastrophizing (like I so often did).
Chances are you just have a complicated case of SIBO, but better safe
than sorry, as they say. So if you are still not better after treating your
SIBO, here is an alphabetical list of other health issues from Dr.
Siebecker that often have similar symptoms:
   Bile acid malabsorption
   Cancer
   Celiac Disease
   Endometriosis
   Food intolerances
   Fructose intolerance
   Gastroparesis
   Gut dysbiosis/large intestine bacterial overgrowth
   Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
   Histamine intolerance
   Hypo- or hyperthyroid
   Hypochloridia (low stomach acid)
   Immune deficiency
   Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s or ulcerative colitis)
   Insufficient chewing
   Lactose intolerance
   Pancreatic enzyme insufficiency
   Parasite infection
   Salicylate intolerance
   Small intestine obstruction
   Stress
   Yeast overgrowth (Candida)

To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                                          CHAPTER 8



                           SIBO-Friendly Recipes

A   lthough I follow Dr. Siebecker’s SIBO Specific Food Guide, some
    of you may already be following one of the other SIBO diet plans.
So again, at the beginning of each recipe I’ve indicated the other diets
for which they would be appropriate. Here is a guide to each label:

BPD: Bi-Phasic Diet
SCD: Speciﬁc Carbohydrate Diet
LF: Low FODMAP Diet
CSD: Cedars-Sinai Low Fermentation Diet
SSFG: SIBO Speciﬁc Food Guide

    When you see SSFG*, the asterisk indicates that the recipe
contains one or more ingredients—such as gluten-free bread or
potato—that are not in the SIBO Specific Food Guide but are in other
SIBO diets and are tolerated by many people with SIBO. So if you
tolerate that ingredient, you can include it in the recipe.
    And, just as a reminder, I’m a vegetarian, as are all of the recipes
in this chapter. If you wish, you can add a protein of your choice
from those listed on this page.
    Finally, in certain instances throughout these recipes I call for an
ingredient—mustard or ketchup, for example—that is “SIBO-
friendly.” What I mean by that is simply that you use a variety or
brand of this ingredient that doesn’t contain anything that would be
irritating to people with SIBO (garlic, onion, or dairy that contains
lactose). Common ingredients to look out for are gums or thickeners
like carrageenan and guar gum, which are often in nondairy milks,
yogurt, ice cream, sauces, and condiments. See the red foods in the
SIBO Specific Food Guide (Appendix) and check the label before you
buy!
   All of these recipes are easy to prepare, most of them are quick
and tasty, so you won’t feel “SIBO deprived.”



RECIPE GROCERY LIST
Here is a list of essential ingredients to stock up on before you begin
the 21-Day plan.

Pantry Items
    Almond flour
    Artichoke hearts, canned
    Baking soda
    Butter
    Chia seeds
    Chocolate chips, dark & dairy-free (as tolerated)
    Coconut: flakes, flour, and shredded
    Coconut aminos
    Coconut milk, full fat (without gums)
    Cranberries, dried
    Dried herbs and spices: Bay leaves; black pepper: freshly ground,
    black peppercorns, whole; cayenne pepper; chili flakes;
    cinnamon; coriander: seeds and ground; cumin; fennel; five
    spice; ginger; Italian herbs (without garlic); lavender (culinary
    grade); mustard, ground; nutmeg; paprika; thyme
    Earl Grey tea
    Espresso or coffee
    Ghee
    Honey (clover—filtered, not raw)
    Kalamata olives
    Lentils, canned
    Mustard, prepared (SIBO-friendly)
    Oils: avocado, coconut, garlic, MCT, olive, walnut
    Pumpkin
    Relish (SIBO-friendly)
    Rice and rice products: brown or white (short- or medium-
    grain), rice cakes, wraps
    Salsa (SIBO-friendly)
    Sea salt
    Tomato paste (organic)
    Tomato sauce (organic, tomatoes only)
    Vanilla extract
    Vegetable broth powder
    Vinegars: apple cider, champagne, rice wine (without sugar),
    white wine vinegar
    Yogurt starter

Refrigerator Items:
    Almond butter
    Butter
    Cheese: Cheddar, mild (aged 30 days or more); Gruyère;
    Parmesan
    Eggs (pasture raised and organic if possible)
    Hot sauce (SIBO-friendly)
    Maple syrup
    Mayonnaise (SIBO-friendly)
    Milk: SIBO-friendly milk of choice, whole 100% lactose-free
    dairy milk
    Nuts: almonds (raw slivered), pecans (raw pieces), pumpkin
    seeds (raw), walnuts (raw pieces)
    Strawberries, organic


                                      Garlic Oil
       I love to cook with garlic oil. It provides delicious flavor without adding
       high FODMAPs because you don’t eat the actual garlic’s fermentable
       fiber. You can use store-bought garlic oil or, to make it yourself, cut a
       garlic clove in half and sauté it in olive oil. Then remove and discard the
       garlic clove and use the oil immediately.



Produce:
    Arugula
    Avocado
    Bananas
    Bell peppers (green, red, and yellow)
    Blueberries (fresh or frozen)
    Broccoli
    Cabbage, red or purple
    Carrots
    Celery
    Citrus fruits: grapefruit, lemons, limes, oranges, tangerines
    (organic for zesting)
    English cucumbers
    Green onion
    Ginger
    Herbs: basil, chives, cilantro, dill, mint, parsley, rosemary,
    tarragon, thyme
    Lettuce (butter or red)
    Microgreens
    Pineapple
    Potatoes, russet and Yukon Gold (organic)
    Spinach (organic)
    Squash: delicata squash, spaghetti squash, zucchini
    Tomatoes (organic)

Freezer Items:
    Acai puree



KITCHEN TOOLS LIST
These tools will make recipe preparation at home much simpler.
   Aluminum foil
   Baking sheets: 8-inch-square, 8 x 12-inch, or 9 x 12-inch baking
   sheet
   Blender
   Can opener
   Candy thermometer
   Chopsticks or Popsicle sticks
   Citrus juicer
   Cutting board
   Food processor
   Grater
Hand mixer
Ice cube tray
Immersion blender
Juicer
Ladle
Mason jars and other storage containers
Measuring cups (for both wet and dry ingredients)
Measuring spoons
Mixing bowls (small, medium, and large)
Muffin tin, 12-cup (silicon or traditional)
Parchment paper
Pastry brush
Pie pan, 9-inch
Pitcher
Pots and pans (a variety of sizes, including saucepans and sauté
pans, a soup pot, and a 10-inch ovenproof pan)
Sharp knives
Sieve or strainer (fine-mesh and general strainer)
Vegetable peeler
Whisks (large and small)
Wooden spoons
Yogurt maker
Zester (for citrus)
DRINKS
                       Get Going Green Juice
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                            Diets: LF, SCD, SSFG


                      Serves 1 (approximately 1¼ cups juice)
                           Prep Time: 10 minutes


Juicing is great for some people following a SIBO diet, but not for
others. This juice, with its light sweetness and combination of
healthy SIBO-friendly veggies, gets me going in the morning. You
don’t need to peel the vegetables, since you’ll be juicing them and
won’t be digesting the fiber. You will need a juicer to prepare this
recipe. Buy organic fruits and vegetables whenever possible.

½ cup chopped green bell pepper
½ English cucumber, chopped
1 carrot, chopped
½ cup fresh or canned (in juice, not syrup) pineapple
1-inch piece of ginger
1 cup (packed) fresh greens, such as arugula or organic spinach

Put all of the ingredients into the juicer and process. Pour the juice
into your glass and enjoy immediately. If you’re very sensitive, you
might want to strain the juice again.

Note:
This juice will keep in the refrigerator for approximately 2 days, but I
think it tastes best when it’s freshly made.
                Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water
                 Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-Free
                   Diets: BPD—Phase 1, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                  Serves 4
                          Prep Time: 10 minutes


Having flavored water available often gets us to drink more. Many
health practitioners recommend that you drink half your body weight
in ounces each day. So if you weigh 150 pounds, you should be
drinking at least 75 ounces of water a day. This turns a beautiful
emerald color when blended, but if you prefer, or if you don’t have a
blender, you can add the cucumber and basil to the water without
blending it. If you do that, just make sure to use a pitcher with a
stopper so the cucumber and basil don’t get poured into your glass,
because they will probably get mushy and not taste so good.

1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded, and chopped or 1 English
   cucumber, peeled and chopped
¼ cup freshly squeezed lime juice
Zest of 1 organic lime
½ cup chopped basil

Measure 4 cups of cold water into your blender container. Add the
cucumber, lime juice, zest, and basil and blend for approximately 1
minute or until the mixture is smooth.
   Strain the mixture into a pitcher to remove any pulp.
   Serve immediately over ice or refrigerate and enjoy for up to 1
week.

Variation:
Try making this water with orange, mint, lemon, or other flavors you
love.
                  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie
                      Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Egg-free
                        Diets: CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                  Serves 1
                           Prep Time: 5 minutes


This is a simple-to-make yet satisfying smoothie that will get your
day started right. If you want a bigger protein boost, you can add the
protein powder of your choice. If you tolerate cocoa, you can add a
tablespoon for a chocolatey flavor. If you love ginger, you can add
even more.

2 tablespoons almond butter (or another nut butter of your choice)
1 tablespoon peeled and chopped fresh ginger
1 medium frozen banana
¾ cup SIBO-friendly milk of your choice
1 teaspoon MCT oil (see Note)

Place the almond butter, ginger, banana, milk, and MCT oil in a
blender. Blend for 1 minute or until all of the ingredients are
liquefied, and serve immediately.

Note:
MCT oil is a supplement made from medium-chain triglycerides,
which are easy to digest due to the shorter length of the triglyceride
chain. Because of that, they act as an immediate source of energy. If
you are not used to consuming MCT oil, start with 1 teaspoon and
work up to the full tablespoon called for in the recipe.
                       Honey Lavender Latte
                            Dairy-free, Gluten-free
                  Diets: BPD—Phase 1, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Serves 1
                           Prep Time: 5 minutes


Even though lavender is floral, it has a surprisingly delicious taste
when combined with honey in this latte. It’s a perfect drink in any
season. To me this is like a yoga retreat in a mug.

1 cup SIBO-friendly milk of choice, heated
½ cup hot espresso or other strong coffee
1 tablespoon Lavender Simple Syrup

Froth the milk by using a hand frother, if you have one, or shake it in
a covered jar until frothy.
   Pour the coffee into a mug large enough to accommodate the
milk. Stir in the simple syrup and the frothed milk.
   Serve immediately.

Cooking Tip:
You can vary the amount of each ingredient to find the ratio that is
just right for you.
                             Earl Grey Latte
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                   Diets: BPD—Phase 1, CSD, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 1
                                Cook Time: 10


This latte makes a delicious and unique morning beverage. You can
make it in larger batches, store it in the refrigerator, and warm a cup
whenever you want. You can also drink it iced if you prefer.

1 bag Earl Grey tea
1 cup boiling water
1 tablespoon Lavender Simple Syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
½ cup SIBO-friendly milk of your choice, heated

Place the tea bag in a cup and cover with the boiling water. Let steep
for 3 to 5 minutes before removing the tea bag.
   Add the simple syrup and vanilla to the hot tea and stir.
   Froth the milk with a hand frother, if you have one, or shake it in
a covered jar until frothy.
   Stir the frothed milk into the tea and serve immediately.

Cooking Tip:
You can add more or less milk and/or simple syrup to suit your
personal taste.
BREAKFASTS
                     Blueberry-Lemon Muffins
                           Dairy-free, Gluten-free
                           Diets: LF, SCD, SSFG


                         Serves 12 (1 muffin per serving)
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


Thank goodness I can still have muffins even though I have SIBO.
These don’t rise as much as muffins made with wheat flour, but
they’re still delicious. They will keep, tightly covered, in the
refrigerator for up to 1 week, and they can also be frozen. Remove
from the freezer and warm in the oven or the microwave for
breakfast or a snack.

2 cups almond flour
¾ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon sea salt
2 large eggs
¼ cup clover honey
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon olive oil
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Zest of one organic lemon
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 cup blueberries, fresh or frozen

Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a 12-cup muffin tin with silicon or
paper cups.
    Place the almond flour, baking soda, and salt in a medium bowl
and stir until the ingredients are incorporated.
    Add the eggs, honey, olive oil, vanilla, lemon zest, and lemon juice
to the dry ingredients and mix until well combined. Gently fold in the
blueberries.
    Fill each muffin cup three-quarters full and bake for 20 to 25
minutes or until the muffins are golden brown.
   Remove from the oven and cool for 5 minutes before removing
the muffins from the tin.

Variations:
If you don’t like or can’t tolerate blueberries, you can substitute
another type of berry. You can also replace the lemon zest and juice
with orange zest and juice, which are slightly sweeter.

Ingredient Tip:
When you’re buying honey, make sure that it’s actually certified
honey, and that it’s cooked, doesn’t have the comb in it, and doesn’t
have added ingredients, such as high-fructose corn syrup.
                       Easy Veggie Scramble
                            Gluten-free, Nut-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Serves: 1
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 7 minutes


The beauty of a veggie scramble is that you can add whatever
vegetables agree with you at any given time. Always start with the
ones that take longest to cook and then add those with shorter
cooking times. Last, add the eggs—easy peasy!

1 tablespoon butter, salted or unsalted or ghee, or coconut or
    avocado oil
¼ cup green, red, or yellow bell peppers, chopped into bite-size
    pieces
¼ cup broccoli florets, chopped into bite-size pieces
1 green onion (green part only), sliced
½ cup chopped arugula
2 large eggs, whisked
¼ cup shredded Cheddar cheese or other SIBO-friendly cheese of
    choice (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste

Melt the butter in a medium nonstick skillet over medium-high heat.
   Add the bell pepper and broccoli and sauté for 2 minutes or until
the vegetables turn golden and begin to soften.
   Reduce the heat to medium and add the green onion and arugula.
Cook for 2 more minutes.
   Add the eggs and cheese if using and stir the mixture with a
spatula as the eggs begin to cook. Add the salt and pepper and
continue to stir until the eggs are cooked but not brown.
   Remove from the heat and serve immediately.
SIBO Tip:
If you’re having trouble keeping weight on, add a second tablespoon
of ghee, butter, or oil to the scramble when you add in the eggs. It
will make the scramble extra rich and also add some calories.
                            24-Hour Yogurt
                       Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                        Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                  Serves 8
                 Prep Time: 30 minutes/Cook Time: 24 hours


Making your own yogurt can seem daunting, but once you’ve done it
once or twice you’ll realize how easy it is. Topped with honey,
granola, or fruit, this is a great breakfast. And the yogurt can also be
used in many recipes, including smoothies or the Ranch Dressing
recipe on this page.
   Cooking the yogurt for 24 hours removes all the lactose, making it
low fermentable and a probiotic powerhouse. For many people, 24-
Hour Yogurt is a supportive part of their diet because it helps them
maintain weight or have better bowel movements. Start with a small
amount (such as a teaspoon or a tablespoon) and start increasing the
quantity to determine your own tolerance level.

Special Equipment:
YOGURT MAKER
CANDY THERMOMETER


2 quarts whole milk or half-and-half (or amount as specified on
   your yogurt maker)
1 packet Yogourmet yogurt starter or another SIBO-friendly starter
   of your choice

Make an ice water bath by placing two trays of ice cubes and cold
water in a pan large enough to hold the saucepan you will use to heat
the milk.
   Place the milk in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat.
Attach the thermometer to the side of the pan and heat the milk to
180°F, stirring frequently.
    Place the pan in the ice water bath until the milk cools to 110°F,
stirring frequently.
    Add ½ cup of the cooled milk to the yogurt machine container.
Add the yogurt starter and whisk to combine thoroughly with the
milk. Whisk in the rest of the milk and place the top on the yogurt
container.
    Heat at 110 degrees for 24 hours, then refrigerate for about 3
hours until firm.
                         Acai Smoothie Bowl
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                          Diets: CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 1
                           Prep Time: 10 minutes


I love beautiful and nutrient-dense smoothie bowls! Plus, they taste
just as good as ice cream.

One 100-gram package frozen acai puree, defrosted
1 frozen banana
¼ cup frozen blueberries
⅓ cup SIBO-friendly milk of your choice, or more as needed
¼ cup Grain-Free Granola (recipe follows) (optional)
1 tablespoon clover honey (optional)
Sliced fruit from SSFG green foods list on this page (optional)

Place the acai, banana, blueberries, and milk in a blender and
process until smooth.
    If the mixture is too thick and isn’t blending well, add in another
tablespoon of milk.
    Pour the mixture into a bowl and top with granola if using, honey
if desired, fruit if using, or another topping of your choice and serve
immediately.
                            Berry Compote
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                              Makes about 3 cups
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


If you use strawberries in this recipe, consider buying organic
because the Environmental Working Group (EWG) lists strawberries
among the Dirty Dozen—that is, one of the fruits with the most
pesticide residue when conventionally grown.

2 tablespoons coconut oil, salted or unsalted butter, or ghee
4 cups blueberries and/or organic strawberries, fresh or frozen
2 teaspoons freshly squeezed lemon juice (optional)
1 tablespoon clover honey (optional)

Place the oil in a medium saucepan over medium heat. When it is
melted, add the fruit, lemon juice if using, and honey if desired and
stir to combine.
    Bring to a simmer, stirring occasionally, and reduce the heat to
medium-low. Cook for about 20 minutes, stirring occasionally, until
the mixture thickens to your liking.
    Serve immediately or store tightly covered in the refrigerator for
up to 1 week.

Cooking Tip:
For a thicker compote, cook the berries a bit longer. For a thinner
compote, reduce the cooking time. The berries can also be blended
with an immersion blender to break them down and make them
more digestible.
                         Grain-Free Granola
                     Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Egg-free
                     Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                           Serves 8 (½-cup serving)
                Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


This granola is also good as a breakfast cereal and makes an excellent
topping for yogurt. Nuts and coconut can be hard for some people to
digest, so start with a smaller amount if you’re not sure of your
tolerance.

⅔ cup unsweetened coconut flakes (not shredded coconut)
1 cup raw slivered almonds
1¼ cups raw pecan pieces
1¼ cups raw walnut pieces
½ cup raw pepitas (hulled pumpkin seeds)
3 tablespoons chia seeds (optional; don’t use for BPD, SCD, SSFG)
⅓ cup dried cranberries
1 teaspoon five spice powder
½ teaspoon sea salt
2 tablespoons olive oil or melted coconut oil
¼ cup maple syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla extract

Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper or aluminum foil.
   Place the coconut flakes, almonds, pecans, walnuts, pepitas, chia
seeds, and cranberries on the prepared baking sheet.
   In a small bowl, mix the five spice powder, salt, oil, maple syrup,
and vanilla.
   Pour the spice mixture over the nuts and stir to make sure all the
nuts are coated. Spread the nuts out on the baking sheet and bake for
about 9 minutes.
   Remove from the oven, stir, and bake for 9 more minutes. Cool
completely on the baking sheet set on a wire rack.
   The granola will keep at room temperature in an airtight
container for about 2 weeks.

Ingredient Note:
If you don’t like five spice powder, feel free to replace it with
cinnamon or just leave it out. You can also use different kinds of
nuts, depending on your preference.
                    Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites
                    Gluten-free, Nut-free optional, Egg-free
                       Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                          Makes 12 large or 24 small bites
                  Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 5 minutes


Now you can have delicious frozen yogurt with granola on the go!
Leave out the grain-free granola to make the recipe nut-free. You can
also use a different type of fruit if you prefer.

1 cup fresh or frozen and defrosted blueberries
2 tablespoons clover honey
1 cup full-fat 24-Hour Yogurt
1 cup Grain-Free Granola (optional)

Place a full-size 12-cup silicone muffin tin or a 24-cup miniature-size
silicon muffin tin on a baking sheet.
    Combine the blueberries and honey in a medium bowl.
    Crush the blueberries with the back of a wooden spoon until at
least half are broken and juicy.
    Add the 24-Hour Yogurt and mix well.
    Divide the granola equally among the muffin cups.
    Spoon the yogurt mixture over the granola and freeze for 2 or
more hours.
    Store in a glass or plastic container in the freezer.

Ingredient Tip:
The ingredients in this recipe are breakfast foods, but you can make
these frozen yogurt treats into a dessert by adding more honey, some
dairy-free chocolate chips, or any other delicious items you can
tolerate.
APPETIZERS AND SNACKS
                                  Angel Eggs
                         Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                               Serves 12 (2 per serving)
 Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 15 to 20 minutes if you’re boiling your own eggs


These are called “Deviled Eggs,” but I like a more positive name. If
you’re not cooking for a crowd, you can halve this recipe. Organic or
cage-free hard-boiled eggs are also at many stores, including Costco
and Trader Joe’s.

12 large hard-boiled eggs
⅓ cup nondairy SIBO-friendly mayonnaise
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon SIBO-friendly mustard
2 shakes SIBO-friendly hot sauce, such as McIlhenny Tabasco
    (optional)
½ teaspoon sea salt
Paprika for garnish (optional)

Cut each egg in half lengthwise and separate the yolks from the
whites, being careful to keep the whites in one piece.
   Place the yolks in a medium bowl and the whites on a platter.
   Crumble the yolks with a fork and add the mayonnaise, mustard,
hot sauce if using, and salt.
   Mix well. If the mixture is too thick for your particular taste, add
more mayonnaise or mustard until it is the consistency and flavor
you prefer.
   Place 1 teaspoon of the yolk mixture into the center of each egg
white. Garnish with paprika if desired and serve immediately.

Variations:
Try adding herbs such as parsley or dill or using an additional
topping such as Tapenade.
                Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots
                    Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                        Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                        Makes 12 to 16 ounces, about 12 servings
   Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 10 minutes plus 24 hours refrigeration time


You can do all carrots or all cucumbers for this recipe, if you prefer.
And if you don’t have time to make the pickles, you can eat the sliced
cucumber dipped in rice wine vinegar. The pickled vegetables will
keep for up to 4 weeks in the refrigerator.

1 English cucumber, cut into spears
2 carrots
1 cup clover honey
1 cup apple cider vinegar
1 cup white or sugar-free rice wine vinegar
1 tablespoon sea salt
1 tablespoon coriander seed
1 sprig fresh dill
½ teaspoon dry mustard
1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns
2 dried bay leaves, crumbled
1 pinch chili flakes (optional)

Place the cucumber spears in a quart-size Mason jar that will
withstand boiling liquids. Place the carrots in an 8-ounce Mason jar.
   Place the honey, vinegars, salt, coriander seed, dill, mustard,
peppercorns, bay leaves, and chili flakes if using in a saucepan over
medium-high heat.
   Bring the mixture to boil, stirring frequently to incorporate the
honey.
   Remove from the heat and carefully pour the mixture over the
cucumber and carrots.
  Cool to room temperature, then cover and refrigerate for 24
hours.

SIBO Tip:
English cucumbers have thinner peels than regular cucumbers, but if
you have difficulty digesting any foods with peels it’s better to peel
the cucumber.
                     Roasted Artichoke Hearts
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                   Serves 4
                Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


These roasted artichoke hearts are delicious on their own, but you
can also add them to a salad or use them for scooping up a dip, such
as the Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip.

One 14-ounce can water-packed artichoke hearts
1 tablespoon infused garlic oil (see this page)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste

Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
   parchment paper.
Drain the artichokes and squeeze any additional water from each
   one individually.
Cut the artichokes in half and place them in a medium mixing bowl
   with the garlic oil. Mix until the oil is evenly distributed.
   Sprinkle with salt and pepper and mix again.
Spread the artichokes cut-side down on the prepared baking sheet
   and bake for 20 minutes or until golden brown.

SIBO Tip:
Normally, globe artichokes are high FODMAP, but because these are
canned, the FODMAPs leech out into the water, which is discarded.
This is typical of several higher FODMAP canned foods such as
lentils.
                      Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites
                        Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                         Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Serves 4 to 6
                 Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 15 minutes


If you don’t like or tolerate tomato sauce, you can always top these
with pesto instead. If fresh basil isn’t available, try using another
vegetable topping such as finely chopped bell pepper.

2 small to medium zucchini (½ to 1 pound total)
¾ teaspoon sea salt
½ cup SIBO-friendly organic tomato sauce (tomatoes only, such as
   Pomi), or more as needed
½ teaspoon dried Italian herb blend
2½ tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
⅓ cup grated Cheddar cheese (or other SIBO-friendly cheese of
   your choice), or more as needed
¼ cup chopped fresh basil (optional)

Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a baking sheet large enough to hold
all of the zucchini with parchment paper.
    Cut the zucchini on the bias into ¼-inch-thick slices.
    Place the zucchini slices in a colander, sprinkle with ½ teaspoon
of the salt, and mix to coat all of the zucchini with the salt. Set aside
for 10 minutes.
    While the zucchini is draining, place the tomato sauce in a small
saucepan and add the herbs, the remaining ¼ teaspoon of salt, and 1
tablespoon of the garlic oil.
    Place over medium heat until the sauce is bubbling, then reduce
the heat to low.
    Place the remaining 1½ tablespoons of garlic oil in a small bowl.
    Gently press the zucchini slices between two paper towels to
remove any excess moisture.
    With a pastry brush, brush the slices on both sides with the garlic
oil and spread them on the prepared baking sheet in a single layer.
    Bake in the preheated oven for 5 minutes. Remove from the oven
but do not turn it off.
    Carefully spoon approximately 1 teaspoon of sauce onto each slice
and top with 1 teaspoon of the cheese. You may need more or less of
both the tomato sauce and the cheese depending on the size of your
zucchini.
    Sprinkle a pinch of basil, if desired, over the cheese. Return to the
oven for 10 minutes or until the cheese is melted.
    Serve immediately.

SIBO Tip:
On the SCD diet, only hard aged cheese is considered “legal” because
it is considered the only kind that is lactose free. However, according
to the Monash University low FODMAP app, most cheese, in
specified amounts, is low FODMAP and doesn’t contain lactose.
Another way to see if your cheese contains lactose is to look at the
label. If it says 0 grams of sugar, that means it doesn’t contain
lactose, which is a fermentable milk sugar. That said, no matter
which diet you’re on, it’s always important to test new foods in small
amounts to see what you personally can tolerate.
                  Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip
                           Gluten-free, Nut-free
                        Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Serves 8
                Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


Creamy spinach dip is a perennial favorite. Here, we’ve just tweaked
the ingredients to make it SIBO-friendly. You can scoop up the dip
with SIBO-friendly crackers, vegetables, or the Roasted Artichoke
Hearts.

1 cup chopped fresh organic spinach
One 14-ounce can water-packed artichoke hearts, drained and
    chopped
1 cup SIBO-friendly mayonnaise
1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice

Preheat the oven to 375°F.
   In a medium bowl, combine the spinach, artichoke hearts,
mayonnaise, cheese, and lemon juice.
   Spread the mixture evenly in an 8-inch-square pan or a
comparable casserole dish and bake in the preheated oven for 25
minutes or until golden brown. It may take 2 or 3 minutes longer.

SIBO Tip:
While all of the ingredients in this dip are SIBO-friendly, the
mayonnaise and Parmesan cheese make it quite heavy. If you have a
problem absorbing fat, start with a small amount and see how you
tolerate it.
SOUPS, SALADS, AND SANDWICHES
                      Broccoli Cheddar Soup
                       Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                        Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                  Serves 4
                Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 30 minutes


Even though there is no cream in this soup, it has a depth of flavor,
and both the broccoli and the Cheddar shine through. Freeze or store
tightly covered in the refrigerator for up to 4 days.

2 tablespoons avocado oil
1 bunch green onions (green part only), chopped
1 stalk celery, chopped
2 carrots, chopped
3 cups fresh or frozen broccoli florets
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
½ teaspoon dry mustard
1 pinch cayenne pepper
4 cups low FODMAP vegetable broth (see Ingredient Tip)
1 cup shredded mild Cheddar cheese, aged 30 days or more
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste

Heat the avocado oil over medium heat in a saucepan large enough
to hold all of the vegetables.
   When the oil is shimmering but not smoking, add the green
onions, celery, carrots, and 1½ cups of the broccoli. Sauté, stirring
often, for 7 minutes or until the vegetables are beginning to soften.
   Add the nutmeg, dry mustard, and cayenne and cook for 1 more
minute. Add the vegetable broth, raise the heat to high, and bring to
boil. Reduce the heat to a simmer and continue to cook for 10
minutes or until the vegetables are soft.
   Using an immersion blender, blend the vegetables and broth until
smooth.
   Add the remaining 1½ cups of broccoli, raise the heat to medium-
high, and bring the mixture to a boil. Reduce the heat to a simmer
and cook for 7 more minutes or until the broccoli is tender.
   Remove from the heat and stir in the Cheddar cheese until the
cheese is melted fully and incorporated
   Taste and then add salt and pepper.

Ingredient Tip:
I use Casa de Sante Vegetable Stock Powder to make a low FODMAP
vegetable broth.
                        Delicata Squash Soup
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 4
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 60 minutes


If you’re having a hard time with your digestion, soup is often easier
on the system because it’s already a liquid. This soup includes
coconut milk, a healthy fat that will keep you full longer.

2 delicata squash (about 1½ pounds total)
2 tablespoons avocado oil
4 green onions (green parts only), chopped
1 stalk celery, chopped
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1 teaspoon cumin
4 cups low FODMAP vegetable broth (see Ingredient Tip)
1 cup canned pumpkin
1 cup full-fat coconut milk (preferably without gums)
Freshly squeezed juice of 1 lime
4 teaspoons chopped fresh cilantro

Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper or aluminum foil.
    Cut off the ends of the squash, cut them in half lengthwise, and
remove the seeds.
    Place the squash cut-sides down on the baking sheet and bake in
the preheated oven for 35 minutes or until the flesh has softened.
    When cool enough to handle, scoop out the flesh and set it aside.
    Heat a medium saucepan over medium heat and add the avocado
oil. Add the green onions and celery and cook for 5 minutes or until
softened. Add the coriander and cumin and sauté for 1 more minute.
Add the broth, cooked squash, and pumpkin. Bring to boil, then
reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 10 minutes.
    Remove from the heat and puree the soup with an immersion
blender. Stir in the coconut milk and lime juice.
    Ladle into bowls and top each bowl of soup with 1 teaspoon of
cilantro.

Ingredient Tip:
I use Casa de Sante Vegetable Stock Powder to make a low FODMAP
vegetable broth.

Variation:
You can substitute a different type of squash for the delicata if you
wish. Some squash are more dense than others, so you can add more
or less broth as needed. If you’re one of those people who just hate
cilantro, leave it off.
                      Shivan’s Soothing Soup
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 2
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 30 minutes


You can prep all the dry ingredients, bag them up, and freeze them
until you’re ready to cook your soup. Use organic ingredients
whenever possible.

1 handful fresh spinach, washed and dried
1 whole butternut squash, peeled and diced
1 zucchini, diced
½ cup chopped leeks, green part only
Beet (1 thin slice)
1 sweet potato, peeled and diced
3 carrots, diced, with skin
1 vegetable bouillon cube without any garlic or onion (such as Casa
   de Sante)
2 quarts water

Prep the spinach, butternut squash, zucchini, leeks, beet, sweet
potato, and carrots. Once prepped, put them in a quart-size freezer
bag and freeze until you are ready to cook the soup.
   Combine the bouillon cube and water in a pot large enough to
hold all of the ingredients. Add the frozen vegetables and bring to a
boil. Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 30 minutes or until
the vegetables are soft.
   Puree the soup or strain out the vegetables and drink the broth.
                  Citrus and Roasted Fennel Salad
                   Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                       Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                    Serves 4
                 Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 15 minutes


This salad is visually stunning, especially if you use citrus in a variety
of colors. Along with navel oranges and tangerines, look for a small
pink or yellow grapefruit and blood oranges, which will be a darker
orange or red inside.

1 cup chopped fennel
1 tablespoon avocado oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
2½ pounds of a variety of citrus, such as oranges, tangerines, or
    grapefruit
½ avocado, cubed
1 tablespoon chopped fresh chives
¼ cup extra-virgin olive oil
3 tablespoons champagne vinegar
1 tablespoon clover honey
1 tablespoon chopped mint leaves

Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper or aluminum foil.
    Spread the fennel on the baking sheet, sprinkle with the avocado
oil, and toss to coat it well.
    Sprinkle the fennel lightly with salt and pepper and roast in the
preheated oven for 15 minutes or until golden. Remove from the
oven and set aside to cool.
    Slice the peels off the citrus and then cut them crosswise into
rounds. Place them on a serving platter and sprinkle the cooled
fennel and avocado over the fruit.
   In a small bowl, whisk the olive oil into the champagne vinegar
until it is emulsified. Add the honey and whisk until incorporated.
   Pour the dressing over the salad and top the salad with chopped
mint leaves.

SIBO Tip:
Eighty grams of grapefruit (approximately ⅓ cup) is considered low
FODMAP on the latest version of the Monash University list even
though it doesn’t appear on the SSFG.
                 Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich
                       Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free
                        Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                   Serves 4
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 30 minutes


You can vary the salad by adding in any herbs you have on hand,
such as tarragon, basil, cilantro, or parsley, and vegetables such as
chopped cucumbers, green onions, cherry tomatoes, pickles, or bell
peppers. If you don’t tolerate rice cakes, put the salad in a lettuce cup
or on SIBO-friendly crackers.

8 large eggs
⅓ cup SIBO-friendly mayonnaise
1 tablespoon SIBO-friendly mustard
1 teaspoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
½ stalk celery, finely chopped
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
4 SIBO-friendly rice cakes (no onion, garlic, or other high
    FODMAP ingredients)
Paprika for garnish

Place the eggs in a medium saucepan and cover them with cold
water. Bring to a boil over medium heat and remove from the heat.
Let the eggs stand in the hot water for 12 minutes.
   Meanwhile, fill a medium bowl with cold water and ice cubes.
   Transfer the eggs to the bowl of cold water until they are cool
enough to handle. Peel and place the eggs in a medium bowl.
   Mash the eggs with a fork and mix in the mayonnaise, mustard,
lemon juice, celery, dill, chives, salt, and pepper.
   Place one-quarter of the mixture on each rice cake and sprinkle
with the paprika.
   Rainbow Veggie Spring Rolls with Almond Dipping Sauce
                      Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Egg-free
                           Diets: BPD, LF, SSFG*


                                  Serves 8
                          Prep Time: 40 minutes


If you can’t tolerate some of the herbs or vegetables in this roll,
simply leave them out and add another ingredient that works better
for you. If you want to eat one as a main meal, add some seared tofu
for protein. If you’re new to wrapping spring rolls, there are multiple
online videos that demonstrate the process.

3 tablespoons sugar-free rice wine vinegar
2 tablespoons olive or avocado oil
⅓ cup almond butter or another nut butter of choice
2 tablespoons coconut aminos
1 tablespoon finely minced fresh ginger
8 round rice paper wrappers
4 leaves butter or red leaf lettuce, cleaned and torn in half
1 cup chopped fresh cilantro
24 fresh mint leaves
16 fresh basil leaves
2 small carrots, thinly sliced into matchstick pieces
1 cup red or purple cabbage, shredded fine
1 small English cucumber, peeled and thinly sliced into matchstick
    pieces
1 avocado, cut into thin slices
1 red bell pepper, thinly sliced into matchstick pieces

In a medium bowl, whisk together the rice wine vinegar, oil, nut
butter, coconut aminos, and ginger and set aside.
   Fill a rimmed baking sheet with warm water. Dip one rice paper
wrapper in the water for a maximum of 5 seconds.
   Set the rice paper on a cutting board or a baking sheet lined with
parchment paper and place half of a lettuce leaf in the middle.
   Spread one-eighth portion of the herbs and vegetables lengthwise
down the middle of the lettuce.
   Fold the short ends of the wrapper inward and gently roll the long
edge as tightly as possible.
   Set the roll aside and repeat for the remaining rolls.
   Serve immediately with the dipping sauce.

Ingredient Tip:
Coconut aminos is a savory sauce that is available in many large
markets as well as online.

SIBO Tip:
While white rice isn’t on the SSFG, both white rice and white potato
are on other SIBO diets and are often recommended for people who
want to add more carbohydrates to their diet to avoid excessive
weight loss. If you are going to try white rice or white rice products,
start with a small amount and increase the portion size slowly to
determine your tolerance.
ENTRÉES
                      Spaghetti Squash Lasagna
                        Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                       Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 6
            Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 1 hour and 40 minutes


This lasagna highlights low FODMAP spaghetti squash with all the
familiar taste of traditional lasagna. It’s great for a family dinner or
to take to a potluck.

1 large spaghetti squash (about 4 pounds)
1 tablespoon avocado oil
2 cups SIBO-friendly canned tomato sauce (tomatoes only, such as
    Pomi)
2 tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
2 teaspoons Italian herbs (without garlic)
1 teaspoon dried fennel (optional)
1¼ teaspoons sea salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
4 cups freshly grated white Cheddar cheese (aged at least 30 days)
1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese (aged at least 30 days)

Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a baking sheet with parchment
paper.
   Cut the spaghetti squash in half widthwise. Remove the seeds and
then cut each half in half. Brush each of the four pieces with ¾
teaspoon of the avocado oil.
   Place the squash on the parchment paper cut-side down and use
the tip of a sharp knife to poke several holes in each piece.
   Roast the squash in the preheated oven for 60 minutes. Remove
from the oven and set aside to cool. Reduce the oven temperature to
375°F. Using a fork, scrape the flesh off the squash rind and set it
aside.
    In a medium saucepan over medium heat, combine the tomato
sauce, garlic oil, Italian herbs, fennel if desired, salt, and pepper.
When the mixture is hot, reduce the heat to low and keep it warm.
    In a medium mixing bowl, combine the Cheddar and Parmesan
cheeses.
    Spread 2 tablespoons of the sauce in the bottom of an 8 x 12-inch
or 9 x 12-inch baking pan. This will prevent the squash from sticking
to the pan.
    Spread a third of the squash over the sauce. Add a third of the
remaining sauce and a third of the cheese. Repeat twice, ending with
a layer of cheese.
    Bake for 40 minutes or until the cheese is golden brown on top.
    Allow the lasagna to rest for 10 minutes before cutting.
                       Mexican Baked Potato
                       Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                           Diets: CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                  Serves 2
           Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 1 hour and 15 minutes


Potatoes aren’t listed on the SSFG, but Dr. Siebecker typically
recommends white rice or peeled white potatoes for those who
tolerate starch and want more carbohydrates in their diet. According
to Monash University, white potatoes are low FODMAPs (however,
the skins contain fiber, which is fermentable).

2 small russet potatoes, washed and dried
2 teaspoons avocado oil
1 teaspoon sea salt
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 small red bell pepper, seeded and chopped
1 small zucchini, peeled (if desired), halved lengthwise, and
    chopped
½ teaspoon ground cumin
1 tablespoon salted butter
2 tablespoons 24-Hour Yogurt, plus more for topping
¼ cup freshly grated Cheddar cheese (aged 30 days or more)
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
2 green onions (green parts only), chopped
2 tablespoons SIBO-friendly salsa or chopped tomatoes

Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil.
   Prick each potato with a fork in eight different places. Coat each
potato with 1 teaspoon of avocado oil and rub each with ¼ teaspoon
salt.
   Place the potatoes directly on the middle oven rack and the
baking sheet on the rack below.
    Cook the potatoes for 1 hour or until the skin is crisp and the flesh
is easily pierced with a knife.
    Transfer the cooked potatoes to two dinner plates.
    Heat the olive oil in a medium sauté pan over medium-high heat.
Add the bell pepper and cook, stirring often, for 4 minutes or until it
begins to soften. Add the zucchini, cumin, and ½ teaspoon of the
remaining salt and cook another 3 to 5 minutes, stirring frequently.
Remove from the heat and set aside.
    Cut each potato almost from end to end, without fully cutting
them in half. Squeeze the ends toward each other to loosen the flesh
from the skin. Fluff the flesh with a fork.
    Place 1½ teaspoons butter, 1 tablespoon yogurt, and 1 tablespoon
cheese in each potato. Mix the toppings into the potato flesh.
    Top the potatoes with the vegetable mixture, cilantro, green
onion, salsa, and the remaining cheese.
                             Buddha Bowl
                            Gluten-free, Nut-free
                        Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                  Serves 4
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


You can substitute different vegetables in this recipe depending on
what you tolerate best. Or, if you are not digesting raw vegetables
well, use mostly cooked vegetables and few or no raw items. It’s
important to eat as many foods as possible on any SIBO diet to
support your microbiome, so even having small amounts of a variety
of vegetables is important.

3 cups broccoli florets
3 cups sliced carrots
2 tablespoons olive oil
Sea salt to taste
4 cups warm cooked White Rice or Easy Pesto Rice
1 small English cucumber, peeled and sliced thin
4 large hard-boiled eggs, halved
1 cup chopped red cabbage
1 cup chopped fresh spinach
2 tablespoons fresh microgreens
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives
1 tablespoon chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley
Green Goddess Dressing
½ avocado, peeled and sliced

Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper or aluminum foil.
   Spread the broccoli and carrots on the baking sheet. Toss with the
olive oil and sprinkle with the salt.
   Bake for 10 minutes. Flip the vegetables as best as you can and
bake for 10 more minutes. Remove from the oven and set aside to
cool.
   Meanwhile, place 1 cup of warm rice in each of four bowls. Spoon
the cooked vegetables over the rice.
   Divide the cucumber, egg halves, cabbage, and spinach equally
among the four bowls, arranging the items in separate sections. Top
each bowl with equal amounts of the microgreens, chives, and Green
Goddess Dressing.
   Top with the avocado slices and serve.

Ingredient Tip:
While most of the ingredients in this recipe are dairy-free, there is
dairy in the yogurt used in the Green Goddess Dressing recipe. If you
prefer a dairy-free version, leave out the yogurt and choose another
dressing, such as the almond sauce in the Rainbow Veggie Spring
Rolls.
                        Cheesy Veggie Frittata
                       Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free
                         Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Serves 6 to 8
                 Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 50 minutes


I’ve listed the frittata in the entrée section because I believe it would
be wrong to relegate it to breakfast alone!

1 red bell pepper, diced
1 yellow bell pepper, diced
1 cup chopped broccoli florets
2 tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
1 tablespoon avocado oil
2 teaspoons sea salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
12 large eggs
¾ cup SIBO-friendly milk
½ cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) salted butter or coconut oil
¼ cup chopped green onions (green parts only)
1 cup finely chopped spinach
½ cup shredded carrots
1 cup Gruyère cheese (optional)

Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper or aluminum foil.
   Spread the bell peppers and the broccoli on the baking sheet and
sprinkle with the garlic oil and avocado oil. Toss to coat the
vegetables and then sprinkle with 1 teaspoon of the salt and the black
pepper.
   Bake for 15 minutes. Remove from the oven and set aside. Reduce
the oven heat to 350°F.
    In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, 1 remaining
teaspoon of salt, and the Parmesan cheese if desired.
    Melt the butter in a 10-inch ovenproof skillet (a cast-iron skillet
works well) over medium heat.
    When the butter is melted, add the green onions, spinach, and
carrots and sauté for 2 minutes.
    Add the reserved broccoli and bell peppers and toss the vegetables
until well combined.
    Reduce the heat to low, pour the egg mixture over the vegetables,
and cook for 2 minutes without stirring.
    Transfer the pan to the oven and bake for 25 minutes or until the
frittata is set in the middle.
    Sprinkle the frittata with the Gruyère if using and bake for
another 3 minutes or until the cheese is melted and starting to
bubble.
    Remove from the oven, cut into six or eight wedges, and serve
immediately.

Cooking Tip:
A frittata is an excellent way to use any leftover roasted vegetables
you have on hand. Harder vegetables should always be roasted first,
while softer vegetables such as spinach can be sautéed in a pan
before adding the eggs.
                             Shepherd’s Pie
                   Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                             Diets: BPD, LF, SSFG*


                                    Serves 6
                Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 50 minutes


Shepherd’s pie is comfort food at its best and a great way to use up
extra mashed potatoes. (See notes about potato in Mexican Baked
Potato.) I’ve added lentils to this version, giving it some extra protein
and extra taste.

2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled and halved
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) unsalted butter, ghee, or coconut oil (or
    use Herb Compound Butter)
½ cup SIBO-friendly milk
½ teaspoon sea salt, or more as needed
2 tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
1 stalk celery, chopped
2 carrots, chopped
1 red bell pepper, seeded and chopped
1 cup finely chopped spinach
6 green onions (green parts only), chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon smoked paprika
¾ cup low FODMAP vegetable broth (see Ingredient Tip)
One 15-ounce can lentils, rinsed and drained
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper

Place the potatoes in a medium or large saucepan and add enough
water to cover the potatoes.
   Bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce the heat to medium-
high and cook for 20 minutes or until the potatoes are soft and easily
pierced with a fork.
   Drain the potatoes and transfer them to a large bowl. Add the
butter, milk, and salt.
   Using a handheld mixer with the whisk attachment, blend the
potatoes, butter, milk, and salt until almost smooth. Taste and add
more salt as needed. Set aside.
   Preheat the oven to 400°F.
   Heat the garlic oil in a large sauté pan over medium-high heat for
1 minute. Add the celery, carrots, and bell pepper to the pan and
sauté for 7 minutes or until they begin to soften. Add the spinach and
green onions and sauté 1 more minute. Add the tomato paste, thyme,
and paprika and sauté for another minute. Add the vegetable broth
and lentils. Add the black pepper.
   Mix to combine all of the ingredients, remove from the heat, taste,
and add more salt if needed.
   Transfer the vegetable mixture to a pie pan or an 8-inch-square
baking pan.
   Cover the vegetables evenly with the mashed potatoes and bake
the pie in the preheated oven for 20 minutes.

Ingredient Tip:
I use Casa de Sante Vegetable Stock Powder to make a low FODMAP
vegetable broth.

SIBO Tip:
We use canned and drained lentils in this recipe because, according
to Monash University, when foods are canned, the FODMAPs leach
out into the canning water.
SIDE DISHES
                                White Rice
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                   Serves 4
                Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


You can always use water to cook your rice, but try broth for added
taste and nutrient density or coconut milk for added taste and
healthy fat. Although these instructions work for most types of
medium-grain rice, double-check the package instructions to see if
the manufacturer recommends a different cooking time.

2 cups water, broth, or coconut milk
1 teaspoon sea salt (unless using salted broth)
1 cup medium-grain white rice (such as jasmine or basmati)
2 tablespoons ghee, butter, coconut oil, olive oil, or Herb
    Compound Butter

Pour the water and salt into a medium pan with a lid and bring to a
boil over high heat.
   Add the rice and stir. Reduce the heat to medium-low, cover, and
cook for 20 minutes without stirring or uncovering.
   Remove the pan from the heat, fluff the rice with a fork, drain off
any excess liquid, and stir in the ghee.
                             Easy Pesto Rice
                   Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                          Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                    Serves 4
                  Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 5 minutes


This recipe will make more than enough pesto, so you can use the
rest as a dip, over roasted vegetables, or on zucchini noodles. It will
keep, tightly covered, in the refrigerator for up to 1 week.

¼ cup garlic oil (see this page)
¼ cup olive oil
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice
6 ounces fresh organic basil or spinach, washed and dried
1 teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper (optional)
¼ cup walnuts or pine nuts (optional)
¼ cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
2 cups cooked brown or white rice

Place the garlic oil, olive oil, lemon juice, basil, salt, pepper, walnuts,
and Parmesan in the bowl of a food processor.
   Process until fairly smooth, scraping down the sides of the
container as necessary.
   Combine the warm rice with ½ cup of the pesto and serve
immediately.

Ingredient Tip:
Basil is harder to find in the winter, so using spinach instead makes
pesto an option all year round.
                         Pineapple Fried Rice
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                   Serves 4
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


It can be particularly challenging when you aren’t able to enjoy
favorite comfort foods like fried rice. In this recipe, we’ve removed
the gluten and soy but maintained the delicious flavor.

1 large egg yolk
2 cups cooked and cooled white rice
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon coconut oil
2 large whole eggs
1½ cups diced fresh pineapple
1 medium organic bell pepper, seeded and diced
¾ cup chopped green onions (green parts only)
½ cup roasted slivered almonds
2 tablespoons coconut aminos (see Ingredient Tip, this page)
1 teaspoon SIBO-friendly hot sauce, such as McIlhenny Tabasco
    (optional)
1 teaspoon garlic oil (see this page)

In a medium mixing bowl, mix the egg yolk into the cooled white rice
so that all of the rice is coated. Set aside.
   In a large sauté pan or skillet, heat 1 teaspoon of the coconut oil
over medium heat.
   Crack the 2 whole eggs into a small bowl and whisk.
   Add the eggs to the pan with the coconut oil and stir for 4 to 5
minutes, until cooked. Remove the scrambled eggs from the pan and
set aside.
   Place the remaining 1 tablespoon of coconut oil in the same pan
and set over medium heat.
    Add the pineapple and bell pepper and sauté for 3 to 5 minutes,
until the bell pepper begins to soften. Add the green onions and
sauté for another minute. Add the egg yolk–coated rice, almonds,
coconut aminos, and hot sauce, if using, and cook, stirring, for 5
minutes or until the egg is cooked.
    Return the scrambled eggs to the pan along with the garlic oil and
stir to combine.

SIBO Tip:
Even though the SSFG doesn’t include rice, Dr. Siebecker herself
recommends white rice to those who tolerate grains in their diet and
for those trying to avoid weight loss. White rice is high glycemic,
which means that it is metabolized quickly and is therefore a low-
fermentable food. Store leftovers in the freezer to prevent the rice
from becoming gummy.
                      Crispy Accordion Potatoes
                        Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                   Serves 4
            Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 1 hour and 15 minutes


You can also top these potatoes with additional ingredients such as
24-Hour Yogurt, chimichurri sauce, or hollandaise sauce.

4 Yukon Gold or small russet potatoes (about 1½ pounds total)
2 tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) salted butter
1 tablespoon chopped flat-leaf parsley

Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil or
parchment paper and set aside.
    Slice the potatoes three-quarters of the way through at ⅛-inch
intervals.
    Place the potatoes on the baking sheet and brush between the
slices with the garlic oil. Sprinkle with salt and black pepper. Bake
for 1 hour and 15 minutes or until golden and cooked through.
    While the potatoes are baking, melt the butter in a small pan and
set aside.
    Transfer the cooked potatoes to a serving plate, drizzle with the
melted butter, and sprinkle with the parsley.

SIBO Tip:
Peeling the potatoes in this recipe is optional, but if you have just
started on a SIBO diet or you know you don’t do well with fiber, it’s
recommended that you peel them so that they’re easier to digest.
                        Easy Mashed Potatoes
                   Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                          Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                    Serves 4
                  Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


Including potatoes in a SIBO diet is a great way to add high-glycemic
carbohydrates that are not so likely to ferment and feed bacteria.
However, not everyone reacts well to the starch in potatoes, so start
with a small amount to assess your tolerance.

2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes
½ cup ghee or salted or unsalted butter at room temperature, olive
    oil, or coconut oil
⅔ cup broth or SIBO-friendly milk of your choice, warmed
1 teaspoon sea salt, or more as needed

Peel the potatoes and place them in a large pot. Add enough water to
fully cover the potatoes and set over high heat. Bring to a boil and
then reduce the heat to medium-high.
    Cook the potatoes for 20 minutes or until they are fork-tender but
not falling apart.
    Drain and transfer the potatoes to a medium bowl. Add the ghee,
broth, and salt and whisk with a handheld electric mixer until
smooth. Taste and add additional salt if desired.

Ingredient Tip:
To make garlic mashed potatoes, substitute 2 tablespoons garlic oil
(see this page) for the ghee in this recipe.
        Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg Free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 4
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


You don’t have to peel a delicata squash, as the peel is edible and
softens when cooked. But if you are just starting a SIBO diet, you can
peel it just so it will be easier for you to digest.

1 large or two small delicata squash (1 pound total)
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon five spice powder
1 teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper

Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with
parchment paper.
    Scrub the squash (assuming you’re not peeling it), cut off the
ends, cut the squash in half lengthwise, and remove the seeds. Cut
each half squash into ½-inch-thick slices.
    Transfer the slices to the baking sheet and sprinkle with the olive
oil, five spice powder, salt, and pepper and toss to coat it evenly.
    Bake for 15 minutes, then turn over the slices and return to the
oven for 10 more minutes or until cooked through and soft.

SIBO Tip:
At this time, delicata squash has not been tested by Monash
University, so the particular low FODMAP amounts are unknown.
However, as with all foods, it’s best to start with small amounts and
increase them as tolerated.
                            Pureed Carrots
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                   Serves 4
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


This recipe can be adapted to suit your preferences. Add some
cinnamon and clover honey for a delicious breakfast dish. Add a
spice such as cumin or some grated fresh ginger to give it a different
flavor profile.

4 cups peeled and chopped carrots
3 tablespoons coconut oil or olive oil
¼ teaspoon sea salt, or more as needed
Freshly ground black pepper to taste

Steam the carrots for 20 minutes or until they are soft but not
mushy.
   Transfer the carrots to the bowl of a food processor, add the
coconut oil, salt, and pepper, and blend until smooth.
   Taste and add more salt, pepper, or other spices if desired.
         Cheesy Baked Carrot Fries with Ranch Dressing
                          Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                           Diets: BPD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                     Serves 4
                  Prep Time: 15 minutes/Cook Time: 20 minutes


These cheesy carrot fries will hit the spot when you need a salty,
cheesy but SIBO-friendly side dish. You won’t need the entire
amount of Ranch Dressing, but it can also be used for side salads or
as a dip for other roasted vegetables. It will keep in the refrigerator
for up to 1 week.

For the Ranch Dressing:
1 cup 24-Hour Yogurt
1 tablespoon garlic oil (see this page)
1 tablespoon chopped fresh chives or 1 teaspoon dried
1 tablespoon chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley or 1 teaspoon dried
1 tablespoon chopped fresh dill or 1 teaspoon dried
¼ cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
¼ teaspoon sea salt, or more as needed
Freshly ground black pepper to taste

For the Carrot Fries:
4 carrots, peeled and cut into sticks (like French fries)
1 tablespoon garlic oil (see this page)
½ cup plus 1 tablespoon freshly grated Parmesan cheese
1 teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
¼ cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley

Make the dressing: Combine the yogurt, garlic oil, chives, parsley,
dill, cheese if using, salt, and pepper in a small bowl. Taste and add
more salt if needed. Set aside. The ranch dressing can be made up to
a day in advance.
    Make the carrots: Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed
baking sheet with parchment paper.
    Place the carrot sticks on the baking sheet and top with the garlic
oil, ½ cup of the Parmesan, salt, and pepper. Toss to evenly coat the
carrots. Bake for 20 minutes.
    Transfer to a serving plate. Sprinkle with the remaining 1
tablespoon of Parmesan and the chopped parsley.
    Serve with the ranch dip.
DESSERTS
                          Honey Macaroons
                      Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                              Makes 30 cookies
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 30 minutes


If you’ve ever wondered about the difference between macaroons and
macarons, it’s that macaroons are made with coconut and macarons
are made with almond flour.

5 large egg whites
¼ teaspoon sea salt
½ cup clover honey
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
3 cups shredded unsweetened coconut
Zest of 1 organic lemon
1 cup dairy-free chocolate chips (optional)
2 teaspoons olive oil

Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line two baking sheets with parchment
paper.
   Place the egg whites and salt in a large mixing bowl and beat with
an electric mixer for 5 minutes, until they are shiny and form stiff
peaks. Stir in the honey, vanilla, coconut, and lemon zest until
incorporated.
   Scoop tablespoon-size rounds of mixture and place them on the
prepared baking sheets.
   Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes, or until the macaroons
are lightly browned at the peaks and on the bottom. Transfer the
baking sheets to cooling racks and cool the cookies completely.
   Melt the chocolate chips, if desired, in a small saucepan over low
heat, stirring often. Using a teaspoon, drizzle each macaroon with a
bit of melted chocolate. Refrigerate for 10 minutes until the
chocolate is firm.
    The macaroons will keep in an airtight container at room
temperature for up to 4 days.

SIBO Tips:
Coconut can be hard for some people to digest. If you’re unsure of
your tolerance, start with just one cookie to see how your system
reacts. You may wind up having to give the rest of the batch to a
friend or coworker, but, when you have SIBO, that’s the way the
cookie sometimes crumbles. Or you could freeze them and try one
again after about a month. Just because you don’t tolerate a
particular food on the first try doesn’t mean you won’t be okay with it
as you heal.
    If you’re following the SCD diet, do not use the chocolate chips.
                            Zesty Lime Pie
                          Dairy-free, Gluten-free
                       Diets: BPD, CSD, SCD, SSFG


                                  Serves 8
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 35 minutes


If you prefer a lemon curd, you can easily substitute lemon juice and
zest for the lime juice and zest. This pie can be topped with fruit
compote, such as blueberry, or a SIBO-friendly whipped topping.

¼ cup melted ghee, salted or unsalted butter, or coconut oil,
    cooled to room temperature, plus ¾ cup ghee, butter, or
    coconut milk
1½ cups almond flour, packed
½ teaspoon sea salt
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
⅔ cup plus 2 tablespoons clover honey
6 large eggs
2 tablespoons lime zest
1 cup freshly squeezed lime juice

Place a fine mesh sieve over a medium bowl and set aside. Preheat
the oven to 350°F.
   Combine ¼ cup of the melted ghee, almond flour, salt, cinnamon,
and 2 tablespoons of the honey in a medium bowl and mix
thoroughly.
   Transfer the mixture to a pie plate and, with your fingers, press it
down and toward the edges to form a crust. Bake the crust for 15
minutes. Remove from the oven and set aside.
   In a medium saucepan, whisk together the remaining ⅔ cup
honey, the eggs, and lime zest.
   Add the lime juice and mix to incorporate.
   Set the saucepan on the stove over medium heat. Add the
remaining ¾ cup ghee and whisk it into the mixture while it melts.
Stir the mixture until it is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon
and bubbles rise to the surface.
   Remove from the heat and pour the curd through the sieve into
the bowl. Once all of the curd is in the bowl, pour it into the prepared
piecrust.
   Refrigerate for several hours before serving.

SIBO Tip:
This recipe isn’t considered low FODMAP because of the amount of
honey it includes, but many people with SIBO tolerate honey quite
well. Before you bake this pie, try honey by itself to see if you tolerate
it.
                  Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding
                   Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                          Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                    Serves 8
                  Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 25 minutes


This rice pudding is creamy and comforting. It makes a delicious
dessert but is also great as a snack, or for breakfast with some
protein on the side.

3 cups SIBO-friendly milk
1 cup full-fat coconut milk
1 cup short- or medium-grain white rice
Zest of 1 organic orange
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon ground nutmeg
½ teaspoon sea salt
3 tablespoons clover honey (or maple syrup if not following the
    SSFG)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract

Place SIBO-friendly milk, coconut milk, rice, orange zest, cinnamon,
nutmeg, and salt in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat.
Bring to a boil and then reduce the heat to a simmer.
    Simmer, stirring occasionally, for 20 minutes or until the rice is
cooked and the mixture thickens into a pudding. Stir more frequently
as the liquid evaporates to make sure the rice doesn’t stick to the
bottom of the pan.
    Remove from the heat and add the honey and vanilla.
    Cool and serve warm or chilled. The pudding will keep, tightly
covered, in the refrigerator for up to 1 week.

Ingredient Tip:
This pudding has a light sweetness, but you can add more or less
honey depending on your tolerance and taste preference.
                         Ginger Almond Cookies
                              Dairy-free, Gluten-free
                         Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                               Makes 2 dozen cookies
                   Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 14 minutes


These chewy cookies have a nice gingery taste without being
overpowering. Since they are relatively flat, they pack or freeze well.

½ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon sea salt
2 tablespoons coconut flour
1 teaspoon ground ginger
1 cup almond butter
½ cup clover honey
1 large egg, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh ginger
Sea salt flakes (optional)

Preheat the oven to 350°F.
    Line two baking sheets with parchment paper.
    Combine the baking soda, salt, and coconut flour in a medium
bowl and stir until well mixed. Add the almond butter, honey, egg,
and ginger and mix well.
    Scoop 12 heaping teaspoonfuls of dough, spaced evenly apart,
onto each baking sheet.
    Sprinkle the cookies with salt flakes if desired and bake in the
preheated oven for 12 to 14 minutes, until the cookies are golden.
    Transfer the baking sheets to cooling racks and allow the cookies
to cool on the baking sheets.

Ingredient Tips:
If you tolerate chocolate chips, you can add ½ cup to the dough if
desired.
    Sea salt flakes are larger (flakier) than regular sea salt and have a
nice mouthfeel on cookies, but you can use regular sea salt as well.
                      Chocolate-Covered Bananas
                     Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                               Diets: CSD, LF, SSFG*


                                      Serves 4
                Prep Time: 10 minutes/Cook Time: 10 minutes


You can either refrigerate or freeze these bananas—some people
prefer the texture of a frozen banana while others enjoy them less
solid. The SSFG doesn’t specifically include chocolate, but many
people with SIBO do well with small amounts of dark chocolate. If
you are not sure of your tolerance level, start with a small amount.

Special Equipment:
4 POPSICLE STICKS OR CHOPSTICKS


2 ripe but still firm bananas
1 cup dark dairy-free chocolate chips
2 teaspoons avocado olive or walnut oil
Optional toppings: Grain-Free Granola, chopped nuts, coconut
    flakes, shredded coconut, or mini dairy-free chocolate chips

Line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
   Cut the bananas in half crosswise and insert a Popsicle stick or
chopstick into the cut end of each half. Place the banana halves on
the baking sheet and refrigerate or freeze for 15 minutes.
   In a double boiler or a small saucepan set over low heat, melt the
chocolate chips with the avocado oil, stirring frequently.
   Place the optional toppings of your choice on separate plates.
   Spoon the chocolate over each frozen banana half and
immediately roll them in the topping of choice.
   Return the bananas to the baking sheet and freeze for 30 minutes
or until the chocolate sets.
   Serve immediately, store in the refrigerator for up to 2 days, or
freeze for up to 1 week.

SIBO Diet Tip:
Depending on the diet you follow, a banana in a specific stage of
ripeness may or may not be recommended. On the SSFG, bananas
are listed as “fresh,” meaning a banana in any stage of ripening.
However, on SCD, only ripe bananas with brown spots are
acceptable. According to the Monash low FODMAP app, one medium
unripe banana is low FODMAP while no more than one-third of a
medium ripe banana is low FODMAP. Confusing, right? The best
thing to do is to try small amounts of ripe or unripe bananas and see
what you can tolerate. I’ve had the best luck with bananas that are all
yellow, without brown or green.
                SAUCES AND CONDIMENTS
Sauces and condiments are the false eyelashes of food—small changes that make a big impact. I have
            never appreciated mustard as much as I do in this phase of my dietary life.
                         Quick and Easy Aioli
                      Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                               Makes 1¼ cups
                           Prep Time: 7 minutes


Aioli is a delicious lemony, garlicky mayonnaise that tastes better
than you ever thought mayonnaise could. This recipe is SIBO-
friendly, since it calls for garlic oil and not raw garlic. You can serve
it as is or add an herb, such as dill, for an additional kick. It’s
delicious on raw or cooked vegetables, and you can use it as a dip for
just about anything you could think of. It will keep, tightly covered,
in the refrigerator for up to 3 days.

1 large pasteurized egg
½ teaspoon SIBO-friendly mustard
Freshly squeezed juice of 1 lemon
½ teaspoon sea salt
½ cup garlic oil (see this page)
½ cup avocado oil

Combine the egg, mustard, lemon juice, and salt in the bowl of a food
processor and mix at high speed for 2 minutes.
   Pour the garlic oil and avocado oil through the food pusher in the
top portion of the food processor. There is a small hole in the pusher
that will allow the oil to drip through slowly.
   Continue to mix as the oil drips in. Once all of the oil has been
added, stop the processor and transfer the aioli to a small bowl. Use
at once or store in the refrigerator for up to 2 days.

Note:
I like to use pasteurized eggs because it reduces the risk of
salmonella—and remember, we all should be avoiding food
poisoning!
                     Thousand Island Dressing
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Makes ½ cup
                            Prep Time: 5 minutes


Thousand island dressing isn’t just for salad. It’s also delicious on
baked potatoes, on grilled cheese sandwiches, with crackers, or with
vegetables.

½ cup SIBO-friendly mayonnaise
2 tablespoons SIBO-friendly ketchup
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
2 teaspoons clover honey
⅛ teaspoon sea salt
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
2 tablespoons SIBO-friendly relish
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh chives

In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise, ketchup, vinegar,
honey, salt, and pepper. Stir in the relish and chives until
incorporated. Serve immediately or store in the refrigerator for up to
1 week.
                     Green Goddess Dressing
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                Makes 1¼ cups
                           Prep Time: 10 minutes


This dressing is said to have originated at the Palace Hotel in San
Francisco, when the chef wanted to pay tribute to the actor George
Arliss, who was then starring in a play titled The Green Goddess.
Both the play and the dressing were hits then, and at least the
dressing is still a hit today.

1 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley leaves
1 packed cup fresh spinach leaves
2 tablespoons tarragon leaves
3 tablespoons minced fresh chives
3 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice
1 tablespoon champagne vinegar
¼ cup garlic oil (see this page)
¼ cup avocado oil
¼ cup SIBO-friendly mayonnaise
¼ cup 24-Hour Yogurt
½ teaspoon sea salt
Freshly ground black pepper to taste

Combine the parsley, spinach, tarragon, chives, lemon juice, vinegar,
garlic oil, avocado oil, mayonnaise, yogurt, salt, and pepper in a
blender and blend until smooth.
   Serve immediately or keep tightly covered in the refrigerator for
up to 3 days.
                      Herb Compound Butter
                       Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                Makes ½ cup
                          Prep Time: 10 minutes


Herb butter is delicious on grilled, roasted, or steamed vegetables. It
keeps well in the refrigerator or freezer and you can easily cut off a
few pieces at a time. I used to think this type of “fancy” butter was
just for holidays, but if you have SIBO, you have to pull out all the
stops to make eating enjoyable. The sweet version is also amazingly
satisfying.

½ cup (1 stick) salted butter, at room temperature
1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary
2 teaspoons chopped fresh chives
2 teaspoons chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley
1 teaspoon chopped fresh thyme

Place the butter, rosemary, chives, parsley, and thyme in a medium
bowl and mix thoroughly with a spoon.
   Use a spatula to remove the butter mixture from the bowl and
place it on a piece of wax paper.
   Form it into a log and wrap the paper around it. Refrigerate or
freeze until needed.

Ingredient Tip:
Try making a sweet version of this butter with clover honey or maple
syrup and orange rind instead of the herbs. If you don’t tolerate dairy
well, you can always use coconut oil instead of the butter.
                                Tapenade
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                      Diets: BPD, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                 Makes ¾ cup
                           Prep Time: 10 minutes


Tapenade makes a great dip for SIBO-friendly crackers or vegetables.
It’s delicious over grilled vegetables or a protein of your choice.

2 tablespoons garlic oil (see this page)
One 12-ounce jar kalamata olives
2 tablespoons drained capers
½ teaspoon dried Italian herbs without garlic

Place the garlic oil, olives, capers, and herbs in the bowl of a food
processor and blend until pureed but still slightly chunky.
    Scrape the tapenade from the processor with a spatula and serve
it immediately or store tightly covered in the refrigerator for up to 1
week.

SIBO Tip:
When looking for jarred items such as olives, capers, or spices, make
sure there aren’t added ingredients, such as garlic, that many people
don’t tolerate well.
                       Lavender Simple Syrup
                  Dairy-free, Gluten-free, Nut-free, Egg-free
                  Diets: BPD—Phase 1, CSD, LF, SCD, SSFG


                                  Makes 1 cup
                 Prep Time: 5 minutes/Cook Time: 40 minutes


This simple syrup can also be made without the lavender or you can
use other herbs, such as thyme or basil, and use it to flavor
lemonade. If you want to be really lazy, you can buy it online, but it’s
extremely easy to make. Culinary lavender is available at organic
grocery stores, at Whole Foods, and online.

½ cup clover honey
1 tablespoon culinary lavender, organic if possible

In a small saucepan, combine ½ cup water with the honey and
lavender and set it over medium heat. Stir frequently until the honey
is liquefied and mixed with the water.
    Remove from the heat and let stand for 30 minutes. Strain the
mixture through a fine mesh sieve to remove the bits of lavender.
    Use the strained syrup at once or store it, tightly covered, in the
refrigerator for up to 1 week.

Cooking Tip:
You can make larger batches so long as you maintain a fifty-fifty ratio
of honey to water.
                       AFTERWORD

I  no longer suffer from SIBO. With the help of wonderful, dedicated
   doctors and nutritionists, I’ve learned how to manage my
condition, and when symptoms flare up—as they will—I know what
to do to overcome them.
    My goal is that this book will help you to do the same. If you have
symptoms of IBS but have never heard of SIBO, you’ll now know for
the first time what’s been causing your symptoms. If you’ve just
learned that you have SIBO, you won’t have to repeat all the missteps
I took or go down the wrong roads I traveled, because I’ve already
identified them for you. If you’ve known for some time that you have
it and haven’t gotten the help you needed, I hope this book can be
that help.
    My purpose is to empower you to take control of your own health,
and, if necessary, take this book to your doctor so that he or she can
learn more about how to help you. Be sure to visit my website,
sibosos .com, for more resources and information. The SOS stands
for Save Our Selves. Each time we pick up a book, search online, and
most importantly, take action, we’re doing just that: saving our
selves.
    If you hear yourself saying the words “I’ve tried everything,” ask
yourself this: “Have I really, really tried everything?” There is always
another stone to overturn and another place to look. You have a
mission to accomplish in this world; don’t let your health hold you
back from achieving that. Don’t give up. You deserve to be well.

                                                            xoxo, Shivan
                      APPENDIX
       The SIBO Specific Food Guide for Vegetarians
Adapted from Dr. Allison Siebecker’s SIBO Specific Food Guide

                LESS FERMENTABLE (“Green Foods”)
                              ↓
                MORE FERMENTABLE (“Red Foods”)


                          VEGETABLES
           “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
  Artichoke hearts*, ⅛ cup
  Arugula
  Bamboo shoots
  Beet, 2 slices
  Bok choy, 3½ ounces
  Broccoli, ½ cup/1.6 ounces
  Brussels sprouts, 2 sprouts
  Cabbage: Savoy, ½ cup
  Carrot
  Celery root/ Celeriac
  Chives
  Cucumber
  Eggplant
  Endive
  Fennel bulb, ½ cup, leaves, 1 cup
  Green beans, 10 beans/2½ ounces
  Greens: lettuce, collard, chard, kale, spinach
  Olives
  Peas, green, ¼ cup
  Peppers, hot chili, 1 scant ounce
  Peppers, sweet bell
  Radicchio, 12 leaves
  Radish
  Rutabaga
  Scallion, green part only
  Snow peas, 5 pods
Squash, butternut, ¼ cup, kabocha, sunburst, yellow


     “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Artichoke hearts*, ¼ cup
Asparagus, 1 spear
Butternut squash, ½ cup/60 grams
Cabbage, 3.5 ounces
Cabbage, Savoy, ¾ cup
Leek, ½ /1½ ounces
Parsnip
Peas, green, ⅓ cup
Peppers, hot chili, less than 1½ ounces
Spinach, 15 leaves
Tomato, soup or juice
Tomato, Sun-dried, 2 tablespoons


         “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Artichoke
Asparagus, 4 spears
Avocado
Beet, 4 slices
Bok choy, 4½ ounces
Broccoli, 1 cup/3.2 ounces
Brussels sprouts, 6 sprouts/4 ounces
Cabbage, Savoy, 1 cup
Cauliflower
Celery
Fennel bulb, 1 cup; leaves, 3 cups
Garlic
Jerusalem artichoke
Leek, 1 leek/3 ounces
Mushrooms
Onions
Peas, green, ½ cup
Scallions, white part
Shallot
Snow peas, 10 pods
Sugar snap peas
Zucchini, ¾ cup


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Bean sprouts
Canned vegetables
Corn
Okra
Potato, sweet
Potato, white, all varieties
Seaweed
Starch powder: arrowroot, corn, potato, rice, tapioca
Taro
Turnip
Water chestnuts
Yam
Yucca



                            FRUITS
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Tomato
Zucchini, ¾ cup
Banana, fresh or dried
Berries: blueberries, less than 80 berries; boysenberry; raspberry;
  strawberry, 10 pieces
Carambola
Citrus: lemon, lime, oranges, tangelos, tangerine
Currant, dried, 1 tablespoon
Dragon Fruit
Grapes
Guava
Jam/Jelly, homemade (no pectin, sugar)
Kiwi
Longan, 5½ ounces
Melon: cantaloupe (a.k.a. rockmelon), honeydew, ½ cup/ 3½
  ounces
Papaya/Paw Paw
Passion fruit, 4 pulps
Pineapple
Pomegranate, ½ pomegranate, ¼ cup seeds
Prickly Pear
Rambutan, 2
Rhubarb


     “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Cherries, 3
Cranberry, 1 tablespoon
Grapefruit, ½ grapefruit
Honeydew melon, ½ cup/3½ ounces
Longan, 10
Lychee, 5
Passion fruit, 4 pulps
Pineapple, dried, 1 slice
Rambutan, 4
        “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Apple
Apricot
Avocado
Berries: cranberry, 2 tablespoons; blueberries, more than 80/100
  grams; blackberries; raspberries, more than 50; cherries, 6
Canned fruit in high FODMAP fruit juice
Currants, dried, 2 tablespoons
Custard Apple
Date, dried
Fig, dried
Grapefruit, 1
Mango*
Nectarine
Papaya, dried
Peach
Pear
Pear, Asian
Persimmon
Plum
Pomegranate, 1, ½ cup seeds
Prunes
Raisins
Tamarillo*
Watermelon


         “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Jam/Jelly, commercial
Plantain



                LEGUMES AND BEANS
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Lentil, brown, ½ cup; green and red, ¼ cup
Lima, ¼ cup


     “Yellow Foods”— SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Black
Lentil, green and red, ½ cup
Lima, ⅓ cup


        “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Baked beans
Borlotti/Cranberry
Kidney/Red
Lima, ½ cup
Navy/White/Haricot
Split peas


         “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Butter
Cannellini
Chickpea/Garbanzo
Fava/Faba/Broad
Pinto
Soy



                     NUTS AND SEEDS
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Almonds, 10 nuts/0.42 ounces; flour, 2 tablespoons
Coconut: flour/shredded, ¼ cup; milk (with no thickeners)
Hazelnuts, 10 nuts
Macadamia, 20 nuts
Peanut butter, 4 tablespoons
Peanuts, 32 nuts
Pecans, 10 nuts
Pine nuts, 1 tablespoon
Pumpkin seeds, 2 tablespoons
Sesame seeds, 1 tablespoon
Sunflower seeds, 2 teaspoons
Walnuts, 10 nuts


     “Yellow Foods”— SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Chestnuts, 1 handful
Flaxseed, less than 1 tablespoon
Hazelnuts, 20 nuts
Pecans, 40 nuts
Walnuts, 3½ ounces


        “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Almonds, 20 nuts; flour, ¼ cup
Cashews
Hazelnuts, 80 nuts
Pine nuts, 8 tablespoons
Pistachios
Pumpkin seeds, 3½ ounces
Sesame seeds, 3½ ounces
Sunflower seeds, 3½ ounces


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Chia seeds
Coconut milk with thickeners (guar gum, carrageenan)
Seed flour



                             DAIRY
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Butter
Cheese, aged more than 1 month; dry curd cottage cheese; yogurt
  cheese/labneh
Eggs
Ghee
Yogurt: homemade 24-hour


     “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Cream: lactase-treated, ¼ cup
Milk: 100% Lactose-free


        “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Yogurt: lactose-free commercial (pectin)


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Cheese: cream cheese, cottage cheese, fresh cheese (feta,
  chevre, fresh mozzarella), ricotta
Cream
Kefir: commercial, homemade 24-hour
Milk
Sour cream: commercial
Yogurt: commercial



                       SWEETENERS
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Aspartame, occasionally
Glucose/Dextrose
Honey: alfalfa, cotton, clover, raspberry, 2 tablespoons
Saccharine: pure (no high FODMAP or SCD illegal additives)
Stevia: pure (no inulin), in small amounts, occasionally


     “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
Honey*: blackberry, buckwheat, citrus/orange blossom, 1
 tablespoon


         “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
Honey*: acacia, sage, tupelo


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Agave syrup
Barley malt syrup
Brown rice syrup
Cane sugar (Rapadura, Sucanat)
Coconut sugar
Fructose, powdered
High-fructose corn syrup
Maple syrup
Molasses
Polyols/Sugar alcohol: isomalt, erythritol, lactitol, maltitol, mannitol,
  sorbitol, xylitol
Sucralose
Sugar/Sucrose



             BEVERAGES AND ALCOHOL
          “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Common Drinks
Coffee (weak), 1 cup per day
Cranberry juice, pure
Fruit juice from Low FODMAP fruits, ⅓ cup/3.4 ounces
Orange juice, fresh, ½ cup/4.2 ounces
Tea: black (weak), chamomile, ginger, green, hibiscus, lemongrass,
  mate, mint, oolong, rooibos/rooibos chai, rose hip
Water
Alcohol
Occasionally, in moderate amounts (See Note below):
Bourbon
Gin
Vodka
Whiskey/Scotch
Wine
                 “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
            Common Drinks
            Seltzer/Carbonated beverages
            Tea: green, less than 2 cups per day


                    “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
            Common Drinks
            Fruit juice from high FODMAP fruits
            Orange juice, 1 cup/4.2 ounces
            Alcohol
            Rum: light or gold*


                      “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
            Common Drinks
            Coffee substitutes
            Soda (fructose, sucrose)
            Tea: chicory root, licorice, pau d’arco
            Alcohol
            Beer
            Brandy
            Hard cider
            Liqueurs/Cordials
            Rum: dark
            Sherry
            Tequila
            Wine: dessert/sweet, sake, sparkling, port


Note:
Moderate amounts of alcohol are:
Women—1 ounce per day, 3 to 5 times per week; Men—2½ ounces per day, 3 to 5 times
per week

Moderate amounts of wine are:
Women—4 ounces per day, 3 to 5 times per week; Men—9 ounces per day, 3 to 5 times
per week


                                   FATS AND OILS
                      “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
            Butter
            Coconut oil
Garlic-infused oil
Ghee
Macadamia oil
Medium-chain triglyceride/MCT oil
Olive oil
Palm oil
Polyunsaturated vegetable oils: Borage, Canola, Flax, Grape-seed,
  Hemp, Pumpkin seed, Sesame, Sunflower, Walnut


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Soybean oil



        SEASONINGS AND CONDIMENTS
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
All spices except onion and garlic
Garlic-infused oil
Ginger, fresh and dried
Mayonnaise, homemade or commercial with honey
Mustard, without garlic
Pickles/Relish, with no sweetener or garlic
Tabasco
Vinegar: apple cider, distilled white, red and white wine
Wasabi, pure


          “Red Foods”—SCD Illegal, HIGH FODMAP
Asafoetida powder
Chicory root, including leaves
Cocoa/chocolate, unsweetened
Gums/Carrageenan/Thickeners
Sauces or marinades with High FODMAP/ SCD Illegal items
Soy sauce/Tamari
Spices: Onion and garlic powder
Vinegar: balsamic



        PROTEINS—TO ADD IF YOU WISH
         “Green Foods”—SCD Legal, LOW FODMAP
Bacon, with honey
Beef
Broth: homemade meat or marrow bones (no cartilage)
Eggs
Fish
             Game
             Lamb
             Organ meats
             Pork
             Poultry
             Seafood


                  “Yellow Foods”—SCD Legal, MODERATE FODMAP
             Bacon, w/sugar 1x per week


                     “Orange Foods”—SCD Legal, HIGH FODMAP
             Broth: homemade bone/cartilage


                                 “Red Foods—SCD Illegal
             Bacon, w/high-fructose corn syrup
             Deli/Processed meat with sugar, carrageenan, high FODMAP or
              SCD illegal additives
             Note: While not included in the SSFG, firm tofu is low in FODMAPs
              and works for many people.


To view the references cited in this chapter, please visit healingsibo.com/references.
                 Acknowledgments

I never expected to be writing a book about digestive health, and I
  couldn’t have done it without the knowledge and guidance of some
very special experts. First and foremost, Dr. Allison Siebecker, who
not only transformed my health but became a dear friend. Her
contribution to SIBO healing has benefited thousands of people, and
I hope this book further spreads her message. I have listened to
hours of her teaching and am sharing what I have learned from her
in this book. A special thank-you to her, also, for her medical review
and consultations as I wrote this book. Dr. Mark Pimentel has also
been incredibly generous with his time and knowledge, bringing light
to a condition often overlooked by Western medical doctors. A
special thank-you to SIBO nutritionist Kristy Regan for her insights
and advice on the recipes in this book. Many other doctors and
specialists have contributed their knowledge over the years—thank
you to Dr. Mona Morstein, Dr. Nirala Jacobi, Dr. Gary Weiner, Dr.
Steven Sandberg-Lewis, Dr. Rachel Fresco, Dr. Leonard Weinstock,
Dr. Anne Hill, Dr. Michael Ruscio, Dr. Jason Hawrelak, Dr. Satish
Rao, Dr. Lisa Shaver, Dr. Tom Messinger, Dr. Tom O’Bryan, Dr. Ami
Kapadia, Dr. Ken Brown, Dr. Megan Taylor, Dr. Melanie Keller, Dr.
Ilana Gurevich, Dr. Ali Rezaie, Dr. Sam Rahbar, Dr. Christine
Schaffner, Dr. Suzanne Breen, Dr. Greg Nigh, Dr. Norm Robillard,
Dr. Eric Zielinski, Dr. William Salt, Dr. Ritamarie Loscalzo, Dr.
Robyn Kutka, Dr. Sheila Dean, Gary Stapleton, Eric Hamilton,
Rebecca Coomes, Kiran Krishnan, Larry Wurn, Ocean Robbins,
Donna Gates, Jen Fugo, Kayle Sandberg-Lewis, Summer Bock,
Christine Faler, Steve Wright, Jordan Reasoner, Angela Pifer, Maria
Zilka, Mindy Tobin, Lisa Letizio, Sabrina Zielinski, and Mary Agnes
Antonopoulos. Thank you to Karen Cook and Miles Larsen, who have
been with me since Shivan’s Yoga Studio and have given their time
and love to this project. Thank you to my team: Cyndi Athmanathan,
Lisa Nelson, and Mariel Urner. Thank you to Judy Kern, who was so
helpful in making this book come to life.
   I also want to thank the entire SIBO SOS community, who have
inspired and encouraged me to make helping those with SIBO one of
my life’s work! What started as a passion project has become
multiple online courses (including the SIBO Recovery Roadmap
course with Dr. Allison Siebecker), expert Masterclasses, the
Digestion SOS: Rescue and Relief for IBS, SIBO, and Leaky Gut
docuseries, four SIBO Summits, and much more.
   And, of course, thank you to my husband, David, for unwavering
support through this process. Finally, thank you to Linda Bennett,
my second mom and spiritual teacher, who has always believed in
me, encouraged me, and pushed me to be my best. I couldn’t and
wouldn’t have done this work without you.
        ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ



                                       Index
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided
will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that
location to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader.

Note: Page numbers in italics refer to graphs and charts.


abdominal pain/discomfort
  addressing, 47, 48–50
  and lipopolysaccharides, 33
  probiotics recommended for, 37
  as symptom of IBS, 4
  as symptom of intestinal radiation toxicity, 15
  as symptom of opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
  and weight loss, 28
Acai Smoothie Bowl, 140
acid reflux
  addressing, 57–58
  author’s struggles with, xv
  and peppermint oil, 50
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
acids as symptom of SIBO, 3
acne, 119
activated charcoal, 46, 56
acupressure, 57, 61–62
acupuncture, 32, 61
adhesions, 9–11, 15
Aerodiagnostics, 20
aioli recipe, 201–2
air fresheners, 64
alcohol, 75, 84, 215
alginate, 58–59
Align, 38
allicin extract, 105–6
almonds
  almond dipping sauce recipe, 165–66
  Ginger Almond Cookies, 196–97
Angel Eggs, 146–47
anorexia, 14
antibiotics
  to eliminate bacterial overgrowth, 101–4, 110
  and health history, 94
  impact on intestinal motility, 14
antidepressants, xv, 29
anxiety
  associated with IBS, 39–40
  and cortisol production, 29
  and gastrointestinal symptoms, 33
  and magnesium, 50
  managing, 41
  and methane gas, 25
appetizers and snacks, 145–54
  Angel Eggs, 146–47
  Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip, 154
  Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots, 148–49
  Roasted Artichoke Hearts, 150–51
  Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites, 152–53
apple cider vinegar, 57–58
apples, 74
apps for meal planning, 85
artichokes
  Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip, 154
  Roasted Artichoke Hearts, 150–51
artificial sweeteners, 59
Atrantil, 46
autoimmune diseases, 73, 115
Ayurvedic medicine, xii, xiii


bacteria
  and challenge of prebiotics, 38
  endotoxins released by, 33
  and fiber in foods, 73
  in hiding, 112–13
  and highly fermentable foods, 72
  in large intestine, 2, 3 (see also microbiome, intestinal)
  and nutrition plans for SIBO, 79
  overgrowth of, in small intestine, 1, 3, 6, 8, 16, 33–34
  treating overgrowth in small intestine, 101–8
baked potato recipe, 170–71
baking soda, 57
bananas
  Chocolate-Covered Bananas, 198–99
  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie, 130
Basil-Cucumber Water recipe, 129
bathrooms, xi, 64
beans
  color-coded food guide for, 213
  reintroducing, 84
  and symptom management, 72, 74
  tip for preparing, 74
Bennett, Linda, xxi
berberine, herbs with, 104–5, 106
Berry Compote, 141
beverages. See drinks and drink recipes
bile, 5, 116
biofilms, 112–13
BioGaia Protectis, 38, 54
Bio.Me Kinetic (Invivo, UK), 13
black cohosh, 49
bloating
  addressing, 45–47, 61
  author’s struggles with, xiv
  and compromised MMC, 8
  natural treatments for, 61
  probiotics as cause of, 35, 53
  probiotics recommended for, 37
  and stress levels, 29
  as symptom of IBS, 4
  as symptom of intestinal radiation toxicity, 15
  as symptom of opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
  as symptom of ovarian cancer, 119
  as symptom of parasites, 22
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
  as symptom of thyroid issues, 15
  triggered by carbohydrates, 68, 69
  and 21-Day Plan, 89
  and visceral hypersensitivity (VH), 48
blood pressure, 50
blood sugar, low, 88
blueberries
  Blueberry-Lemon Muffins, 134–35
  Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites, 144
Bock, Summer, 42–43
body mass index (BMI), 26
bowel movements
  Ayurvedic medicine on, xii
  correct technique for, 54
  with hard stools, 14
  and hemorrhoids, 51–52, 54
  incomplete evacuation, 14
  and probiotics, 54
  and stool softeners, 55
  strained, as symptom of opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
BPD (Bi-Phasic Diet) label, 121
brain fog
  associated with SIBO, 19, 32–34
  probiotics linked to, 35
breakfasts, 133–44
  Acai Smoothie Bowl, 140
  Berry Compote, 141
  Blueberry-Lemon Muffins, 134–35
  Easy Veggie Scramble, 136–37
  Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites, 144
  Grain-Free Granola, 142–43
  24-Hour Yogurt, 138–39
breath test, 16–21
  and results after retesting, 104, 112, 114
  and self-treatment, 104
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  and 21-Day Plan, 90
Breath Trackers/QuinTron, 20
broccoli
  Broccoli Cheddar Soup, 156–57
  Buddha Bowl, 172–73
Brown, Ken, 46
Buddha Bowl, 172–73
butter, herb, 205
butternut squash soup recipe, 160


Campylobacter jejuni, 7
capsaicin, 113
carbohydrates
  gas triggered by, 3, 8, 17, 25, 67, 69
  general symptoms triggered by, 68, 69
  limiting intake of, 67–68, 89
  and symptoms vs. causes of SIBO, 71–72
  See also fermentation of carbohydrates in small intestine
cardiovascular health, 50
carrageenan, 122
carrots
  Buddha Bowl, 172–73
  Cheesy Baked Carrot Fries with Ranch Dressing, 187–88
  Pureed Carrots, 186
  Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots, 148–49
castor oil, 60–61
causes of SIBO
  and associated diseases, 115–18
  finding root cause, 15–16, 23, 94, 114–15, 118–19
  food poisoning, xiii, 6, 8–9, 94
  medications, 14
  physical obstructions in small intestine, 9–11
  radiation, 15
  and relapses, 23, 114–15
  slowed motility in small intestine, 8, 12
  thyroid issues, 15
Cedars–Sinai Low Fermentation Diet (CSD), 80
celery root, 84
celiac disease, 73, 115
Cheesy Baked Carrot Fries with Ranch Dressing, 187–88
Cheesy Veggie Frittata, 174–75
chemotherapy, 116
chewing gum, 59
chocolate
  Chocolate-Covered Bananas, 198–99
  guidelines for, 71
chronic renal failure, 116
citrus
  Citrus and Roasted Fennel Salad, 161–62
  Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding, 194–95
  Zesty Lime Pie, 192–93
coffee
  cream in, 63
  Honey Lavender Latte, 131
  reintroducing, 84
coffee enemas, 55
cognitive performance and probiotics, 35
colon. See large intestine
colonoscopies, 16
color-coding system for food, 83, 211–17
colostrum, 60
combinations of foods, 76
complicated cases of SIBO, xxi, 108, 119
compote recipe, 141
condiments
  color-coded guide for, 216
  Green Goddess Dressing, 204
  Herb Compound Butter, 205
  Lavender Simple Syrup, 207
  Quick and Easy Aioli, 201–2
  Tapenade, 206
  Thousand Island Dressing, 203
constipation
  and activated charcoal, 46
  addressing, 46, 47, 50–55, 61
  author’s struggles with, xii
  and breath test for SIBO, 17
  dehydration as cause of, 54, 77
  and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 116
  and fiber, 52
  and hemorrhoids, 51–52
  and magnesium, 50–52
  and methane gas, 3, 16, 25
  natural treatments for, 61
  probiotics recommended for, 38–39, 54
  and serotonin levels, 30
  and stress levels, 29, 31
  as symptom of IBS, 4
  as symptom of opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
  as symptom of parasites, 22
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
  as symptom of thyroid issues, 15
  triggered by carbohydrates, 69
cookies
  Ginger Almond Cookies, 196–97
  Honey Macaroons, 190–91
Coomes, Rebecca, 86
cortisol, 29
cramps, 3
Creamy Spinach Artichoke Dip, 154
Crispy Accordion Potatoes, 183
Crohn’s disease, 4, 115
cruciferous vegetables, 84
CSD (Cedars-Sinai Low Fermentation Diet) label, 121
cucumbers
  Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots, 148–49
  Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water, 129
Culturelle Pro-Well Health & Wellness, 38
curcumin, 113
cytolethal distending toxin B (Cdt-B), 7, 9


dairy products, 75, 214
d’Angelo, Raphael, 22
d diarrhea, 3
Dean, Shelia, 87
decluttering, 42–43
dental procedures, 14
depression
  and alcoholism, 75
  associated with IBS, 39–40
  and cortisol production, 29
  and lipopolysaccharides, 33
  and methane gas, 25
desserts, 189–99
  Chocolate-Covered Bananas, 198–99
  Ginger Almond Cookies, 196–97
  Honey Macaroons, 190–91
  Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding, 194–95
  Zesty Lime Pie, 192–93
“deviled eggs,” 146–47
diabetes, 115
diagnosing SIBO. See testing for SIBO
diarrhea
  addressing, 47, 55–56, 61
  dehydration resulting from, 78
  and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 116
  and food poisoning, 6, 7, 9
  and hydrogen gas, 3, 16, 25
  and hydrogen sulfide gas, 3, 16, 25
  and magnesium, 46, 51
  natural treatments for, 61
  probiotics recommended for, 37
  and prokinetics, 12
  and serotonin levels, 30
  and stress levels, 29, 31
  as symptom of IBS, 4
  as symptom of intestinal radiation toxicity, 15
  as symptom of parasites, 22
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
  as symptom of thyroid issues, 15
  triggered by carbohydrates, 69
  and weight loss, 27–28
diet
  and diversity in food choices, 69, 75–76, 78, 81
  eating a “perfect,” 68
  foods that reduce symptoms, 70–71
  foods that trigger symptoms, 71–76
  general guidelines for, 76–78
  and “legal” and “illegal” foods, 82
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  and steps to resolve SIBO, xxii
  See also 21-Day Plan; specific foods, food groups, and nutrients
digestion
  bacterial interference in, 3
  and digestive enzymes, 59
  digestive process, 1–2, 2
  and enteric nervous system (ENS), 30
  and food poisoning, 7–8
  and grumbling stomachs, 8, 111
  impact of stress on, 29, 31
  and opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
  and poor absorption of nutrients, 15
  and POTS, 117
  probiotics recommended for, 37–38
  prokinetics’ impact on, 12
  and pureed foods, 70
  and rest-and-digest mode, 29, 31–32, 117
  and serotonin levels, 29–30
  time required for, 46
  See also migrating motor complex
diseases associated with SIBO, 115–18
diversity in food choices, 69, 75–76, 78, 81
diverticulitis, 116
diverticulosis, 11
D-lactic acid, 35, 53
doctors
  communicating with, xviii–xx, 30
  questions for, xx, 91
Doctor’s Best Digestive Health 2 Billion, 38
dressings
  Green Goddess Dressing, 204
  Thousand Island Dressing, 203
drinks and drink recipes, 127–32
  alcohol, 75, 84, 215
  color-coded guide for, 215
  Earl Grey Latte, 132
  Get Going Green Juice, 128
  Honey Lavender Latte, 131
  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie, 130
  Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water, 129
  See also water consumption
drowsiness, 33


Earl Grey Latte, 132
Easy Mashed Potatoes, 184
Easy Pesto Rice, 180
Easy Veggie Scramble, 136–37
eating disorders and SIBO, 81–82
E. coli, 7
eczema, 119
eggs
  Angel Eggs, 146–47
  Open-Faced Egg Salad Sandwich, 163–64
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 115–16
elemental diet, 106–8, 110, 114
emotional health, 28–32
endometriosis, 10
endoscopies, 16, 21
endotoxins, 33
enteric-coated peppermint oil (ECPO), 49
enteric nervous system (ENS), 30
entrées, 167–77
  Buddha Bowl, 172–73
  Cheesy Veggie Frittata, 174–75
  Mexican Baked Potato, 170–71
  Shepherd’s Pie, 176–77
  Spaghetti Squash Lasagna, 168–69
enzymes, 5
erythromycin, low-dose, 12
esophagus, 2
exercise, xv, 63


fasting between meals, 63, 80
fatigue, 15, 22
fats, 216
fennel salad recipe, 161–62
fermentation of carbohydrates in small intestine, 67–69
  and color-coding system for food, 83, 211–17
  and combinations of fermentable foods, 76
  and compromised MMC, 8, 32
   gas as by-product of, 3, 8, 17, 25, 67 (see also hydrogen gas; hydrogen sulfide gas;
      methane gas)
   and highly fermentable foods, 72–75
   and insoluble fiber, 52
   and low FODMAPs/fermentation foods, 69, 71, 79, 80
   of prebiotics, 38
   and 21-Day Plan, 82–83
   and weight loss/gain, 3
fiber
   and diarrhea, 56
   diets low in, 80
   insoluble, 52, 56
   limiting intake of, 89
   normal digestion of, 73
   preparing foods high in, 72, 74
fibromyalgia, 118
fight-or-flight mode, 29, 32
flatulence, 14, 71. See also gas
FODMAPs
   about, 69
   and “legal” and “illegal” foods, 82
   low FODMAP diet, 79, 80, 121
   and symptom management, 74
food diaries, 86
food poisoning, 7–9
   and antibody testing, 9
   and author’s SIBO, xiii, 23
   autoimmune response following, 7, 12
   and compromised MMC, 8
   and IBS–Smart blood test, 94
   incidence of, 6
   and parasites, 22
   and “postinfectious” IBS, 6, 9, 12
   as primary cause of IBS, 6, 8
   as primary cause of SIBO, xiii, 6, 7–9
   and prokinetics, 13
food sensitivities as symptom of parasites, 22
food storage containers, 87
fried rice recipe, 181–82
friends, time with, 64
fries recipe, 187–88
frittata recipe, 174–75
Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites, 144
frozen ingredients list, 125
fructose intolerance, 71
fruits
   carbohydrates in, 68
   color-coded food guide, 212
   fiber content of, 73
   grocery list for, 124–25
  reintroducing, 84
  and symptom management, 72, 74
  that reduce SIBO symptoms, 71


gallbladder, 2
GAPS (gut and psychology syndrome), 81
gardening, 22
garlic, 74, 76, 105
garlic oil, 124
gas
  addressing, 47
  and bean preparation, 74
  elemental diet’s impact on, 107
  in normal digestive process, 73
  pain caused by, 48
  as by-product of fermentation of carbohydrates, 3, 8, 17, 25, 67, 69
  in response to treatment, 112
  and severity of symptoms, 115
  and stress levels, 29
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
  triggered by prebiotics, 38
  and 21-Day Plan, 89
  See also hydrogen gas; hydrogen sulfide gas; methane gas
gastroenteritis, 7
gastroesophageal reflux disease (heartburn or GERD), 14
Gas-X, 47
Get Going Green Juice, 128
GI Motility Complex (Enzyme Science), 13
ginger
  Ginger Almond Cookies, 196–97
  for nausea, 56–57
  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie, 130
  prokinetic properties of, 13
glucose, 18
gluten, 73
glycerin suppositories, 55
Grain-Free Granola, 142–43
grains, 72, 73
gram-negative bacteria, 33
granola recipe, 142–43
Green Goddess Dressing, 204
green juice recipe, 128
grief, dealing with, 38–43
grocery list for recipe ingredients, 122–25
guar gum, 122
Gurevich, Ilana, 23
gut-brain connection, 30, 117–18
gut microbiome. See microbiome, intestinal
Hashimoto’s hypothyroidism, 115
Hawrelak, Jason, 35, 36
healing-oriented mindset, 40
health history, 94
“healthy” diet of author, xv
hearing loss, 103
heartburn. See acid reflux
hemorrhoids, 51–52, 54
herbal bitters, 57–58
herbs
  fresh, 87
  herbal antibiotics, 104–6, 110
  Herb Compound Butter, 205
hernias, 54
Hill, Anne, 22
histamines, 33–34, 53, 75
Holmes, Crane, 51
home, decluttering one’s, 42–43
honey
  Honey Lavender Latte, 131
  Honey Macaroons, 190–91
  and SIBO symptoms, 71
  on 21-Day Plan, 68
hormones, 29
hunger, 85, 88
hydration. See water consumption
hydrochloric acid pills, 57–58
hydrogen gas
  antibiotic treatment for, 102, 103
  and breath test for SIBO, 16, 18–19, 114
  diarrhea associated with, 3, 16, 25
  other conditions associated with, 118–19
  and weight gain, 26
hydrogen sulfide gas
  and breath test for SIBO, 16, 18
  diarrhea associated with, 3, 16, 25
hypnotherapy, 62
hypothyroidism, 115


Iberogast, 47
   for acid reflux, 57
   and motility in intestines, 47, 53, 56
   for nausea, 56
   prokinetic properties of, 13, 47
IBgard, 49–50
ibs–smart blood test, 9, 94
ileocecal valve, 6
immune deficiency, 37
immune system
   as defense against bacterial accumulation, 5
   and parasites, 23
IMO (intestinal methane overgrowth), 27
Imodium, 56
Indian lilac (a.k.a. Neem), 104, 105
indigestion, general, 59–60
inflammation, reducing, 60, 102
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
   about, 4
   low FODMAP diet, 80
   as potential cause of SIBO, 4
   probiotics recommended for, 37
ingredients for recipes
   grocery list for, 122–25
   “SIBO-friendly,” 121–22
insoluble fiber, 52, 56
insomnia, 22
insulin resistance, 26
intention setting, 91
interstitial cystitis, 116
intestinal radiation toxicity (post-radiation enteropathy), 15
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
   anxiety/depression associated with, 39–40
   author’s diagnosis of, xiv–xv
   as final diagnosis, 4–5
   from food poisoning, 6, 8, 12, 94
   and IBS–Smart blood test, 94
   and low FODMAP diet, 80
   and melatonin, 65
   pain associated with, 48
   “post infectious” IBS, 6, 9, 12
   probiotics recommended for, 37, 38
   and serotonin levels, 29
   SIBO as underlying cause of, xvii, 3–4, 90
   SIBO’s association with, 115
   symptoms of, 4


Jacobi, Nirala, 81
Jarrow Formulas Ideal Bowel Support 229v, 37
joint pain, 33
journaling to track health, xx, xxi, 86
juice: Get Going Green Juice, 128


kava kava, 49
Kharrazian, Datis, 32
kitchen tools list, 125–26
kombu, 74
Krishnan, Kiran, 33
Lactobacillus reuteri, 53–54
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, 38
lactose intolerance, 15, 21
lactulose, 18–19
large intestine
   and antibiotic treatments, 102
   bacteria in, 2, 3 (see also microbiome, intestinal)
   and digestive process, 2–3, 2
   inflammation of, 4
   migration of bacterial from, 6
   motility, improving, 53
lasagna recipe, 168–69
latte recipes
   Earl Grey Latte, 132
   Honey Lavender Latte, 131
lavender
   Honey Lavender Latte, 131
   Lavender Simple Syrup, 207
leaky gut syndrome, 32, 60, 115, 118–19
“legal” and “illegal” foods, 82
legumes, color-coded food guide for, 213
lemon-blueberry muffins recipe, 134–35
LF (Low FODMAP Diet) label, 121
lime pie recipe, 192–93
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 33
liquid medical food diet, 106–8
liver, 2
liver disease, 116
lovastatin, 102
low-dose naltrexone (LDN), 13
low FODMAP diet, 79, 80, 121
Lyme disease, 117–18


macaroons recipe, 190–91
magnesium, 46, 50–52
malnutrition, 3, 27–28
Mashed Potatoes, Easy, 184
Mathur, Ruchi, 26
meals
 apps for planning, 85
 combinations of foods in, 76
 experiencing symptoms following, 68
 fasting between, 63, 80
 and food storage containers, 87
 freezing, 87
 planning in advance, 86–87
 snacking between, 31, 63
 taking photos of, 86
 timing/spacing of, 62–63, 76–77, 83, 111
 tracking body’s response to, 90
meat products, 68, 88
Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, 6
medical schools, instruction about SIBO in, xxi
medications, 14, 62, 94
meditation, 63
Megaspore, 37
melatonin, 65
menopause, 49
mental state, gut’s interrelationship with, 30
Messinger, Tom, 118
Metagenics UltraFlora Acute Care, 38
methane gas
 antibiotics prescribed for, 102–3
 and anxiety/depression, 25
 and breath test for SIBO, 16, 18, 114
 constipation associated with, 3, 16, 25
 herbal antibiotics for, 105–6
 and hydrochloric acid pills, 58
 and intestinal methane overgrowth (IMO), 27
 other conditions associated with, 118–19
 probiotics recommended for, 38, 54
 and weight gain, 25–26
Methanobrevibacter smithii, 25–26, 27
metronidazole, 102, 103
Mexican Baked Potato, 170–71
microbiome, intestinal
 about, 3
 and antibiotic treatments, 102, 103
 and diversity in food choices, 69, 78, 81
 and fiber content in foods, 73
 and foods that trigger symptoms, 72
migraine headaches, 50
migrating motor complex (MMC)
 as defense against bacterial accumulation, 6
 and fasting between meals, 63, 80
 and food poisoning, 8
 and grumbling stomachs, 8, 111
 impact of stress on, 31, 32
 and mealtimes, 63, 76–77
 and probiotics, 35
 prokinetics’ impact on, 12, 111
 role of, in SIBO, 111, 114
 and sleep, 64
 surgeries’ impact on, 11
Miralax, 51
Morstein, Mona, 37
Motility Activator (Integrative Therapeutics), 13
MotilPro (Pure Encapsulations), 13
muffin recipe, 134–35
Mullin, Gerard, 106
muscles, twitching/cramping, 48, 49


naltrexone, low-dose (LDN), 13
narcotics, 14
nausea
  addressing, 47, 56–57
  as symptom of opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
  as symptom of SIBO, 3
  and weight loss, 28
Neem (a.k.a. Indian lilac), 104, 105
neomycin, 102, 103
non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS), 73
NOW Foods Clinical GI Probiotic, 38
nutritionists, working with, 70
nuts
  color-coded guide for, 213
  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie, 130
  reintroducing, 84


O & P (ova and parasites) stool test, 22
obesity, 26
oils, 216
olive leaf, 113
olives: tapenade recipe, 206
onions, 74
opioid–induced bowel dysfunction, 14
opioids, 14, 94
Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding, 194–95
oregano or oregano oil, 105, 113
osmotic laxatives, 50–51
outdoors, time spent, 22, 63


pancreas, 2
pancreatic enzymes, low, 116
panic, avoiding, 40–41
pantry items, 122–23
parasites, 21–23
parasympathetic nervous system, 29, 61
Parkinson’s disease, 116
Pasricha, Jay, 30
patient advocacy of author, xxi
peppermint oil or tea, 49–50
Pepto-Bismol, 56
Pesto Rice, Easy, 180
pets and parasites, 22
photographing meals, 86
Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots, 148–49
Pimentel, Mark
  and elemental diet, 107, 114
  on food poisoning leading to SIBO, 6
  on hydrochloric acid pills, 58
  on IMO (intestinal methane overgrowth), 27
  on opioids’ association with SIBO, 14
  on prokinetics, 111
  on relapsing, 114–15
  and SIBO flowchart, 109
  and SYN-OIO, 102
  on timing for meals, 63
  and weight gain among SIBO sufferers, 26
Pineapple Fried Rice, 181–82
pizza bites recipe, 152–53
plant-based foods, xv
portion sizes, 76, 83, 88
positivity, 40
“post infectious” IBS, 6, 9, 12
potassium, 55
potatoes
  Crispy Accordion Potatoes, 183
  Easy Mashed Potatoes, 184
  Mexican Baked Potato, 170–71
  Shepherd’s Pie, 176–77
POTS (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome), 116, 117
prebiotics, 38, 53
probiotics, 34–38, 42–43, 53–54
Prokine (Vita Aid), 13
prokinetics, 12–13
  function of, 12, 47
  impact on migrating motor complex, 12, 111
  in preventing relapse, 109, 111
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  Siebecker’s recommendations for, 12–13
  and symptom management, 13
  while taking opioids, 14
protein
  color-coded guide for, 217
  and 21-Day Plan, 83, 85, 88, 121
  vegetarian options for, 88
proton-pump inhibitors, 14
prucalopride (Motegrity, Resolor, or Resotran), 12
psoriasis, 119
pudding recipe, 194–95
pureed foods
  Pureed Carrots, 186
  and symptom management, 70, 87


question journal, xx, 91
Quick and Easy Aioli, 201–2
Quick Pickled Cucumbers and Carrots, 148–49
radiation, 15
Rahbar, Sam, 59
Rainbow Veggie Spring Rolls with Almond Dipping Sauce, 165–66
ranch dressing recipe, 187–88
Rao, Satish, 35
raw foods, 72, 84
reflexology, 61–62
Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water, 129
refrigerated ingredient list, 123–24
Regan, Kristy, 70
relapses of SIBO
   common experience of, 109
   prevention of, 109, 111
   and retesting, 111
   and underlying causes of SIBO, 23, 114–15
rest-and-digest mode, 29, 31–32, 117
restaurants, eating in, 77
restless leg syndrome, 116
rheumatoid arthritis, 116
rice
   Easy Pesto Rice, 180
   Orange Cinnamon Rice Pudding, 194–95
   Pineapple Fried Rice, 181–82
   White Rice, 179
rifaximin (Xifaxan), xvi, 102–3, 112
Roasted Artichoke Hearts, 150–51
Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder, 185
rosacea, 118–19
rosemary, 113
Ruscio, Michael, 42
rutabagas, 84


Saccharomyces boulardii, 37
salads
  Citrus and Roasted Fennel Salad, 161–62
  reintroducing, 84
  and symptom management, 72
salmonella, 7
Sandberg-Lewis, Steven, 54, 109, 111
sandwich recipe, egg salad, 163–64
SCD (Specific Carbohydrate Diet) label, 121
Schulman, Michael, xvi–xvii
scleroderma, 115, 116
scramble recipe, 136–37
seasonings, 216
seeds, 84, 213
serotonin, xv, 29–30
Shepherd’s Pie, 176–77
shigella, 7
shingles, 14
SIBO (small intestine bacterial overgrowth)
  about, 1
  diet for (see 21-Day Plan)
  limited understanding of, in medical field, 4
  relapsing (see relapses of SIBO)
  root cause of (see causes of SIBO)
  symptoms of (see symptoms of SIBO)
  testing for (see testing for SIBO)
  treating (see treatments for SIBO)
SIBO Bi–Phasic Diet, 81
SIBO Center Lab, National University of Natural Medicine (NUNM), 20
SIBO-MMC (Priority One), 13
SIBO Specific Food Guide (SSFG)
  adaptability of, 82–83
  color-coded food guide, 83, 211–17
  as foundation of the 21-Day Plan, 79
  guidelines for, 83–84
  and recipe ingredients, 88
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  and SSFG label, 121
side dishes, 178–88
  Cheesy Baked Carrot Fries with Ranch Dressing, 187–88
  Crispy Accordion Potatoes, 183
  Easy Mashed Potatoes, 184
  Easy Pesto Rice, 180
  Pineapple Fried Rice, 181–82
  Pureed Carrots, 186
  Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder, 185
  White Rice, 179
Siebecker, Allison
  on antibiotic treatments, 102, 103
  on associated conditions, 115, 116
  author’s work with, xviii, xx–xxi
  on breath test for SIBO, 18
  color-coding system for food, 83, 211–17
  on constipation, 50
  on development of SIBO, 6
  on herbal antibiotics, 104–5, 106
  on honey, 71
  on Iberogast, 47
  on limitations of endoscopies and colonoscopies, 16
  on pain management, 49
  prokinetics recommendations of, 12–13
  and remedies for SIBO symptoms, 45
  on retesting for SIBO, 111, 114
  and SIBO flowchart, 109
  and SIBO Specific Food Guide, 79, 81, 83–84
  on symptoms of SIBO, 21
  on vegetables in green smoothies, 72
  on weight loss, 27
SIFO (small intestine fungal over-growth), 21
skin conditions, 33, 34, 119
sleep, 64–65
slurring words, 33
small intestine
  anatomy of, 5
  bacterial overgrowth in, 1, 3, 6, 8, 16, 33–34
  bacterial overgrowth treatments, 101–8
  and conditions leading to SIBO, 9–11
  and digestive process, 2, 2, 7–8
  diverticulosis of, 11
  motility, improving, 47, 53, 56, 60, 61
  motility, slow, 8, 12, 14, 15
  normal bacterial levels in, 3
  obstructions in, 15
  protections against bacterial accumulation, 5–6
  and radiation treatments, 15
  and SIFO (small intestine fungal over-growth), 21
  structural problems in, 11
  See also fermentation of carbohydrates in small intestine
smoothies
  cooking vegetables for green, 72
  Nutty Ginger Banana Smoothie, 130
  smoothie bowl recipe, 140
snacking, 31, 63
social life, SIBO’s impact on, 28–29, 43
soups
  Broccoli Cheddar Soup, 156–57
  Delicata Squash Soup, 158–59
  pureed, 70
  Shivan’s Soothing Soup, 160
Spaghetti Squash Lasagna, 168–69
Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD), 79, 80–81, 82
spices, volatile, 113
Spinach Artichoke Dip, 154
spring rolls recipe, 165–66
squash
  Delicata Squash Soup, 158–59
  Roasted Delicata Squash with Five Spice Powder, 185
  Shivan’s Soothing Soup, 160
  Spaghetti Squash Lasagna, 168–69
SSFG (SIBO Specific Food Guide) label, 121
stomach
  and digestive process, 1–2, 2
  growling of, 8, 111
  See also large intestine; small intestine
stomach acid
  and conditions associated with SIBO, 116
  as defense against bacterial accumulation, 5
  and digestive process, 1–2
  impact of stress on, 29
stools, hard, 14. See also bowel movements
stool softeners, 55
stress
  caused by gastrointestinal symptoms, 31
  as condition associated with SIBO, 116
  and cortisol production, 29
  stress eating, 31
  and vagus nerve, 30–32
supplements, 42–43, 93–94
support groups for SIBO, 39, 94
surgeries, 10, 11, 14
sweeteners, 214
swimming, 22
sympathetic nervous system, 29
symptoms of SIBO
  and conditions that mimic SIBO, 21, 119–20
  discussing, with doctors, xix
  dismissed as “normal,” xiii
  foods that reduce, 70–71
  foods that trigger, 71–76, 82
  gas levels as related to, 113, 115
  managing, xxii, 209
  range of, 3
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  simple remedies for, 45–62
  source of, 8, 69
  and steps to resolve SIBO, xxii
  stress caused by, 31
  tracking, xix
  triggered by carbohydrates, 68, 69
  and 21-Day Plan, 90
  See also specific symptoms, including gas and bloating
SYN-OIO, 102
syrup recipe, 207


Tapenade, 206
telemedicine, xx
testing for SIBO
  author’s experience with, xvi–xvii
  breath test, 16–21, 90, 104, 110, 112, 114
  and diagnosing associated conditions, 114
  endoscopies and colonoscopies, 16
  retesting, 109, 111–12, 113–14, 115
  and SIBO flowchart, 110
  and steps to resolve SIBO, xxii
  stool and urine tests, 16
Thousand Island Dressing, 203
thyme, 113
thyroid issues, 15
tolerance of foods, changes in, 84
traumatic spinal injury, 116
treatments for SIBO, 101–8
  and bacteria in hiding, 112–13
  elemental diet, 106–8, 114
  evaluating results of, 109, 111–12
  herbal antibiotics, 104–6
  multiple rounds of, 114
  prescription antibiotics, 101–4
  retesting following, 109, 111–12, 113–14, 115
  and steps to resolve SIBO, xxii
treats, 82
Trio Smart Breath Test, 20
Tums, 57
24-Hour Yogurt, 138–39
21-Day Plan, 79–99
  and apps for meal planning, 85
  and hunger, 85, 88
  key role of preparation in, 84–85
  and portion sizes, 88
  and protein, 83, 85, 88, 121, 217
  strategies for staying on track, 86–88
  tracking diet and symptoms, 90
  Week 1, 89–93
  Week 2, 93–96
  Week 3, 96–99


ulcerative colitis, 4


vagus nerve, 30–32, 61, 116
vegans, 75
vegetables
  carbohydrates in, 68
  color-coded guide for, 211
  fiber content of, 73
  grocery list for, 124–25
  reintroducing, 84
  and symptom management, 72, 74
vegetarianism, 69, 82–83, 88
veggie scramble recipe, 136–37
vinculin, 7–8, 9, 12
Visbiome, 37
visceral hypersensitivity (VH), 48–49
vomiting, 7, 14


water consumption
 and constipation, 54, 77–78
 Refreshing Basil-Cucumber Water recipe, 129
 from taps or wells, 22
 tracking, 55, 87
weight gain
 and methane gas, 25–26
 as symptom of parasites, 22
 as symptom of SIBO, 3
 as symptom of thyroid issues, 15
weight loss
 associated with SIBO, 3, 27–28
 as symptom of parasites, 22
 as symptom of thyroid issues, 15
whiplash, 116
White Rice, 179
whole grains, 72, 73
Wurn, Larry, 10
Wurn Technique for adhesion treatment, 10–11


yeast, 108
yogurt recipes
  Frozen Blueberry Yogurt Bites, 144
  24-Hour Yogurt, 138–39


Zesty Lime Pie, 192–93
Zesty Zucchini Pizza Bites, 152–53


       ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
                 About the Author
Shivan Sarna is the founder of the SIBO SOS Summits and creator
behind the docuseries Digestion SOS: Rescue and Relief for IBS,
SIBO, and Leaky Gut. She has spent the last twenty years on TV as a
host for the Home Shopping Network. Shivan lives in Florida with
her husband, her cat named Bell, four koi fish, and her adopted
mom, Linda.
                W at’s next on
               your reading list?
                 Discover your next
                     great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this
                         author.
                     Sign up now.
* There is an asterisk following SSFG at the beginning of this recipe
because canned vegetables are “red” foods on the SSFG (and illegal
on the SCD). But that’s because they may contain trace amounts of
ingredients (less than 2 percent) that are not required to be listed on
the label. I don’t believe that most SIBO patients need to be quite
that vigilant, and, in any case, I would never cook a fresh artichoke
for myself, so if I want an artichoke in my life, canned or jarred is the
way I go.
