 ANEW
  IBS
 SOLUTION
   BACTERIA— THE MISSING LINK IN
TREATING IRRITABLE BOW EL SYNDROME




MARK PIMENTEL, MD


            HEALTH
            PwINT
            P R E S S
The information and advice contained in this book are based upon the research
and the personal and professional experiences of the author. They are not
intended as a substitute for consulting with a health care professional. The pub­
lisher and author are not responsible for any adverse effects or consequences
resulting from the use of any of the suggestions, preparations, or procedures
discussed in this book. All matters pertaining to your physical health should be
supervised by a health care professional. It is a sign of wisdom, not cowardice,
to seek a second or third opinion.

COVER DESIGN: Jacqueline Michelus
EDITOR: Larry Trivieri
TYPESETTING AND BOOK DESIGN: Gary A. Rosenberg



H ealth P o in t Press
4335 Van Nuys Blvd
Sherman Oaks, CA 91403
818-788-2040


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


ISBN: 0-9774356-0-1




Copyright © 2006 by Mark Pimentel, MD

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other­
wise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

Printed in the United States of America

10   9    8
        Contents

       Acknowledgments, vii

           Introduction, 1


             PART O N E
       A New Understanding
   o f Irritable Bowel Syndrom e

               CHAPTER 1
         Breaking the Stigma:
   IBS Is Not "All in Your Head," 9

             CHAPTER 2
        Too Fast or Too Slow:
Understanding Your IBS Symptoms, 19

               CHAPTER 3
        Big Brain, Little Brain:
    The G ut's Nerve Network, 31


             CHAPTER 4
  Guess W ho's Coming to Dinner:
  Food Poisoning and Parasites, 37

              CHAPTER 5
          The New Culprit:
      Bacterial Overgrowth, 53
                     PART T W O
            The IBS Treatm ent Plan:
             Putting It All Together

                     CHAPTER 6
                    Help at Last:
    The Cedars-Sinai Protocol for Treating IBS, 69

                     CHAPTER 7
             The Best of Both Worlds:
Enhancing Your Results With Alternative Therapies, 91

                    CHAPTER 8
   Fibromyalgia and Other Associated Conditions:
             The IBS Connection, 103

                     CHAPTER 9
       Good Questions Deserve Good Answers:
               The IBS Forum, 115


                  Conclusion, 131


                    Glossary, 133

                   References, 141

                     Index, 149

               About the Author, 157
          To m y loving wife, R uchi,
 and children, M aya and Luis (aka Weezi).
               They are m y life.


  I would like to fu rth er dedicate this book
            to m y mother, Joanna,
       and late father, Luis P im entel,
who, by exam ple, inspire a strong work ethic
          and dedication to a task.
'
           Acknowledgments




I have many people to thank for this book, but first and foremost, I
need to thank the thousands of IBS patients I have encountered these
past years. My research team is almost 10,000 strong. They, above all,
were my instructors, my guides, and through their experience have
changed IBS everywhere. What patients teach you cannot be learned
in a book, and you must listen in order to hear and learn. If this book
accomplishes only one thing I will be pleased: to empower people
with IBS to realize that a pat on the head can no longer be an accept­
able treatment for IBS.
     I need to take the time to thank my mentors. Can you believe I am
about to thank my chemistry teacher at Hammarskjold High School in
Thunder Bay, Ontario, Mr. David Linklater? He loved chemistry with
contagious enthusiasm. Another is Dr. Ken Van Ameyde. He taught
me to listen for the medical clues from the patient and the art of bed­
side medicine (the traditional way). I need to include Dr. Charles Bern­
stein whose strong sense of academic drive reinforced my desire to
pursue academic gastroenterology. I would particularly like to thank
Dr. Henry C. Lin. He was instrumental in my training as a gut motil­
ity specialist and was a large part of the initial stages of this body of
work. I would also like to thank Dr. Stephan R. Targan, Chief of the
Division of Gastroenterology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. He
has his eye trained on nurturing academic gastroenterologists and
his legacy is still being written. I would particularly like to thank Dr.

                                   VII
                                                      A N ew IB S Solution


Jeffery Conklin. There are rare people you meet in a lifetime who
inspire an enthusiasm in what we do. He is a master clinician. We have
much to learn from his generosity and friendship. I would also like to
thank Dr. Edy Soffer for his contribution to the knowledge of small
bowel physiology.
    I also need to thank all those research personnel who worked so
diligently to accomplish our wild notions (what a roller coaster for
them). These include Dr. Evelyn Chow (the original), Sandy Park (my
right hand), Yuthana Kong (my left hand), Christine Lee (our anchor),
Brian Van den Burg, Fawzia Hegle (in it from the beginning), Robert
Wade (aka "Bobby Wade, GIMT" and "the breath test guru"), Tess Con­
stantino, RN (best motility nurse in the world), Vicky Lees-Kim, RN
(also the best motility nurse in the world), and all the residents who
have contributed to our research efforts. I am watching all of you! To
thank Evelyn, Sandy, and Yuthana is simply not enough. They make
the research happen and are the best one could hope to work with.
    I would graciously like to express my gratitude to the amazing
Larry Trivieri for his assistance in assembling this work. He has an
ability to grasp and translate complex ideas. In addition, Cheri Singer
from the Briefcase was instrumental in producing high-quality tran­
scripts that eased the pain of editing. I would also like to thank copy­
editor Lisa Kaspin and proofreader Carol Rosenberg for their editorial
help.
    I need to express my sincerest thanks to David Knight of BookTalk.
He was the one catalyst for this book. "The time is right for a book to
liberate patients with IBS based on your work." He understands the
power of the written language to make a difference, and people with
IBS need to benefit from this.
    Although there are many other people to thank, I really need to
express my most humble appreciation to Deanna and Hershel Levine
from the Beatrice and Samuel A. Seaver Foundation in New York.
New ideas and concepts are very difficult to get funded. The early
intellectual stage of a bacterial concept in IBS was controversial. Agen­
cies fund safe ideas— ideas with history. This foundation placed much
trust in my efforts and has provided the bulk of the resources to gen­
erate the now cohesive body of scientific evidence that is presented in
this book. In a similar fashion, Daniel Lundberg and many others from
Salix Pharmaceuticals took significant risks in entering the IBS arena
Acknowledgments                                                       /;



with our ideas. Who would have thought a ten-day course of antibi­
otics makes all the difference in IBS?
     Lastly, I need to take the time to thank my wife, Ruchi, and chih
dren, Maya and Luis. The effort has required much time and their
support makes it all possible. My wife is a brilliant research diabetol-
ogist/endocrinologist. Two academic physicians in one house make
for interesting dinner conversation. She tells me that "hormones con­
trol the gut and that makes me your boss." Who can argue with that?
Me. I say, "What would you do if I wasn't here?" I love my wife and
kids. I would also like to thank my brother, Dan, as well as my father
and mother, to whom this book is dedicated.
                    Introduction




    rritable bowel syndrome (IBS), characterized by abdominal pain,

I   bloating, and altered bowel habits, is the most common chronic
    medical condition. Although there is some variation from study to
study and country to country, up to 20 percent of a given population
appears to be affected by this condition. In addition, unlike other
chronic conditions such as heart disease, IBS commonly affects all
ages. In fact, studies have shown that people with IBS have a lower
quality of life than those with heart disease or other chronic medical
conditions. Despite these facts, developments that may identify caus­
es for IBS have happened only recently.
     The progress to find a cause for IBS can hardly be called a race. The
nature of the illness has interfered with that progress; most patients
with IBS find it difficult to discuss their bowel problems with others
and often suffer in silence. This may be due, in part, to the media's ten­
dency to ridicule those with IBS or other digestive conditions such as
lactose intolerance. All of these factors lead to social isolation and con­
tinued unwillingness to discuss the condition, further contributing to
the patients' lower quality of life and the public's ignorance of IBS.
One reason for our lack of knowledge about IBS is the lack of funding
for research into its cause and treatment. Since IBS is not a fatal illness,
it is not given priority for research funding. As a result, researchers
who wish to unravel the IBS puzzle struggle to secure resources;
fundraising takes up time those physicians would otherwise have for

                                     1
2                                                     A New IB S Solution


treating patients. Moreover, only a handful of researchers in the Unit­
ed States are working to identify a cause for IBS. The result is that
most physicians continue to have a poor understanding about IBS.
Often, when a disease is not clearly understood, the first inclination is
to link the disease with the psychological condition of the patient.
There are many historical examples of such thinking. In the 1970s,
there was much discussion about the cardiac risk posed by having a
"type A " personality. We now understand heart disease in a com­
pletely different way, and this reference is no longer part of the med­
ical doctrine.
     In another example, stress was thought to be the main cause of
stomach ulcers until the discovery of the bacteria Helicobacter pylori as
the most common culprit. With the inability of scientists to pinpoint
the causes of IBS, people with IBS have fallen victim to psychological
scrutiny and are often stigmatized as a result. In some cases, this stig­
ma makes it difficult for IBS sufferers to obtain insurance policies,
especially disability insurance.
    To be fair, it is well known that a history of severe psychological
trauma can lead to changes in bowel function. It is also understood
that stress can influence the degree of symptoms in some IBS suf­
ferers. However, it is now known that in most cases stress and psy­
chological problems neither cause nor are associated with IBS. While
this conclusion should be a victory for those with IBS, the stigma
remains since the misconceptions run deep in the grassroots medical
community.
    Many factors have contributed to the declarations that IBS is more
than psychological. For example, in non-university-based medical
studies, the psychological profile of IBS patients is no different from
the rest of the community. This discovery was paralleled by research
contributing to the development of four new theories in IBS.
    The discovery of altered pain perception in the gut was the first of
four key findings. In the 1990s, studies demonstrated that IBS patients
experienced gut pain at much lower thresholds than the general pop­
ulation. In other words, what would not be considered painful to the
gut in normal subjects was perceived as painful in IBS patients. This
led to innovative studies looking at pain processing in the gut and its
transmission to the brain, or the "brain-gut axis." Brain imaging has
since shown that IBS patients respond differently to pain; locations of
Introduction                                                          3


 the brain not otherwise activated by pain were being turned on in IBS.
This work had several limitations; the techniques for measuring brain
 imaging required a high level of expertise and yielded inconsistent
 results among studies. Also, for patients, this concept has not easily
 translated into a better understanding of the causes and treatment of
 IBS.
      One negative outcome of these findings was the initial marrying
of these pain and brain findings to the older psychological theory of
IBS. This union led investigators to consider antidepressant medica­
tions as a potential remedy. Since some antidepressants (especially tri­
cyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline) have also been shown to
have numbing effects on the spine pain fibers (nerves), the fit was too
tempting. While the ill effects of widespread antidepressant use had
some in the scientific community concerned, studies showed that anti­
depressants could slow down bowel movements. Thus the concept
that any antidepressant could work began to take hold. The ultimate
consequence is that antidepressants have been a mainstay of IBS treat­
ment. Shortly after the discovery of heightened sensation in the gut in
IBS, others were taking a different scientific approach. One sentiment
was that IBS was difficult to define because the disease was really a
mixed group of conditions. The division of IBS into subcategories
could in theory simplify its definition, making the causes more appar­
ent. This approach led to the second theory of IBS, in which IBS is a
group of disorders, with the dominant symptom defining each group.
IBS with diarrhea as the main symptom would be labeled "diarrhea-
predominant IBS"; and if constipation were the main feature, the label
would read "constipation-predominant IBS." Efforts were also made
to provide a clear definition of IBS. From this thinking was born what
is now referred to as the Rome criteria.
     Studies then emerged showing that for IBS patients suffering from
constipation, intestinal movements were slower compared with nor­
mal controls. In contrast, in IBS patients suffering from diarrhea, the
gut appeared to propel its contents too fast. Based on this, drug com­
panies began to search for the chemicals produced by the gut that con­
trol its movement. A key chemical is serotonin, secreted by cells that
line the gut wall. When food enters the area, serotonin is released,
causing the gut to contract in a special fashion called "peristalsis."
Peristalsis is a forward movement or spreading of gut contents such
4                                                     A New IB S Solution


as food down the gut. On a simplified level, if there is too much sero­
tonin, there is too much movement; not enough and the gut is slower.
Some IBS studies demonstrated this connection between serotonin
levels and gut movement, which became the basis for a new class of
drugs that block (alosetron, cilansetron, granisetron) or augment
(tegaserod) the sites of action of serotonin.
     The third theory of IBS stems from a pattern that investigators
began to recognize among patients with IBS who had suffered attacks
of acute diarrhea. Approximately 20 percent of IBS sufferers declare
that their bowel habits were perfectly normal until such an attack.
In most cases, the patients recall the incident as a clear case of food
poisoning, while in many other instances, the acute diarrhea began
on a trip abroad. Even after the acute episode of diarrhea subsides, the
bowel habits never return to normal. In light of this history, clinicians
aggressively investigated the stool for infective agents but found noth­
ing, often years after the initial event. The recognition of this symptom
complex has led researchers from Europe and Canada to study food-
poisoning cases. Now, most researchers agree that a certain proportion
of food-poisoning cases will lead to perpetual IBS-like symptoms. This
idea of IBS being precipitated by an intestinal infection was termed
"post-infectious IBS."
     The final, most recent theory defines IBS as a bacterial disease.
People with IBS inevitably complain of gas and bloating. While this
was once considered a major hallmark of IBS, the failure to under­
stand this component led investigators in the 1980s to emphasize what
was more easily grasped; hence the focus on diarrhea and constipa­
tion. Still, even as most members of the scientific community were dis­
tracted by the emphasis on bowel function, others investigated the
bacterial component of IBS. In the 1990s, research showed that IBS
patients (over a given time) produced five times more gas than did
people without IBS. Since the only source of those gases was bacteri­
al, the initial presumption was that IBS patients had excessive bacte­
ria in the colon, where bacteria were expected to be. Subsequent
studies showed that IBS patients had excessive quantities of gas in the
small bowel; these data were the catalyst for studying small bowel
bacteria in IBS.
     Normally, the small intestine contains a very small quantity of bac­
teria. In published studies, indirect measures of small bowel bacteria
Introduction                                                           5


suggest that 84 percent of IBS sufferers have excessive quantities of
bacteria typically found in the colon.
    Intuitively, higher bacterial levels in the small bowel, where
absorption takes place, would ferment the nutrients from the food into
gas. Further work in this area has determined that these bacteria could
produce both constipation and diarrhea, depending on the types of
bacteria that have moved into the small bowel. These results have led
to studies showing that antibiotics can almost completely relieve IBS
symptoms if successful in eliminating the intestinal bacteria. This is
called the "bacterial overgrowth theory of IBS."
    This book takes you through the evolution of thinking in IBS in a
way that can be easily understood. The research is often complex even
for those in the field; physicians and patients alike may get lost trying
to understand the quagmire of opinions and research findings. In the
desire for help, along with frustration with their physicians' limited
understanding of how to treat IBS, many people have turned to alter­
native therapies such as probiotics. While some of these therapies
have positive results, others are not as helpful and, in some rare cases,
may be detrimental. These too will be discussed. While the initial
chapters focus on how the theories of IBS diverge, the final chapters
will show how the theories converge into a unifying hypothesis, and
will give an indication of where IBS developments are heading in
the future.
      PART O N E



A New Understanding
  of Irritable Bowel
      Syndrome
                         CHAPTER            1



      Breaking the Stigma:
    IBS Is Not “All in Your Head”



    will never forget the day Margaret Anne (not her real name) first

i   came to my office. "If you can't help me, I don't know what I will
    do," Margaret began, with a look that pleaded with me to help her.
"I can't go on living like this!"
    By this, Margaret was referring to her interminable struggle to find
a way to properly address a health condition that had burdened her
for many years, sapping her energy and severely affecting her ability
to engage in the day-to-day activities that healthy people take for
granted— simple things like grocery shopping or having lunch with
friends—without the panicked feeling that she might have to cut things
short because of an urgent need to go to the bathroom.
    But these were not the only hurdles Margaret—sixty-five years old
and clearly an intelligent woman— had to contend with. Like count­
less other patients, Margaret had repeatedly been told by many physi­
cians over the years that nothing was physically wrong with her. Their
unanimous diagnosis was that Margaret's gastrointestinal disorder
was due to stress and depression, resulting in irritable bowel syn­
drome, or IBS. Margaret came to believe them, accepting their recom­
mendation that she try antidepressants to control her emotions and
possibly her bowel dysfunction as well.
    While the medications left her feeling calmer, they did nothing to
lessen her complaints. She still experienced altered bowel habits,
abdominal pain, and the associated fears of eating— especially in pub-

                                   9
10                                                     A New IB S Solution


lie places— that are so common to people in Margaret's situation. Yet
the more Margaret told her physicians that their prescriptions were
not working, the more they told her the problems were "all in her
head." Their response to the failing drug treatment was to increase
the dose and, when that didn't work, to add more drugs.
     By the time Margaret came to see me, she was taking three anti­
depressant medications, as well as two other prescription drugs to
ease the constipation caused by the antidepressants. Her bowel situ­
ation had in fact worsened because of the side effects of the anti­
depressants. No wonder the poor woman told me she couldn't go on
living like this.
     To me, the saddest thing about Margaret's predicament was the
fact that all her pain and uncertainty were unnecessary. Margaret's
problems were not "all in her head," nor were they caused by stress
or depression. Just like millions of Americans with similar symptoms,
Margaret was a victim of the traditional medical approach to a poor­
ly defined illness. The result is ongoing pain and discomfort, as well
as the shame associated with the stigma of being diagnosed with a
psychological disease.
     A simple breath test for the presence of intestinal bacteria was con­
ducted on Margaret. The test showed that her problems were due to
an abnormally high concentration of bacteria in her small intestine
(otherwise known as "small intestinal bacterial overgrowth"), which,
as you shall learn, is being shown to be a possible cause of IBS.
    .Once the test results were in, I told Margaret, "I don't think your
problem is psychological." As many others before and since, she
looked at me with a mixture of hope and disbelief. How could I be so
sure I could help her when so many doctors had not? I asked her to
trust me, and then prescribed a course of antibiotics along with dietary
recommendations (which you will also learn about later in this book).
Margaret left my office with the promise that she would try my
approach.
     Two weeks later, Margaret came back to see me. The transforma­
tion she had undergone since her first visit was dramatic. Gone was
the sad, burdened woman at her wit's end. In her place was an obvi­
ously healthy and vibrant woman with an entirely new lease on life.
It wasn't that the therapy cured her depressive symptoms so much as
it normalized her bowel function, validating her claim "the problem
Breaking the Stigma                                                     11


is in my gut." In her hand, she carried a brown bag, the contents of
which she dumped on my desk. I looked down to see the bottles con­
taining the five medications she had been placed on before our first
visit.
     "Thank you, doctor," she said, her face aglow with a beaming
smile. "I no longer need these!" I administered another breath test,
which confirmed that the antibiotics had done their job. Her bacterial
overgrowth was a thing of the past and, with it, all of the unexplained
bowel symptoms Margaret had suffered with for so many years.
     Margaret's turnaround may seem amazing, especially to readers
who suffer from IBS and struggle to find a solution to their problem,
but most IBS cases are like Margaret's. More important, you can expe­
rience the same relief that Margaret did, once you read about the
research seeking the cause of IBS and learn about treatments based on
that research. But first, I want to explain why IBS is routinely and often
inaccurately thought to be "all in a patient's head." From my per­
spective, it is this label and the stigma it places on people with IBS that
lie at the heart of why so many millions of people continue to need­
lessly suffer in silence.


IBS: T H E P S Y C H O LO G IC A L LA B EL
Why is IBS so commonly thought to have psychological origins?
    Until recently, most physicians have not clearly understood IBS,
much less its cause. All that was known was that stress can alter bowel
function and frequency; during times of acute stress, people often
have diarrhea or experience nausea or other gastrointestinal distur­
bances. As a result, since the 1970s, IBS has routinely been thought by
health professionals to result from stress and/or related psychological
disturbances.
    The medical community has a history of considering stress to be a
possible factor in poorly understood conditions that are later deemed
to have more practical causes. Perhaps the most famous example of
this is the "type A personality," routinely accepted by doctors as a
strongly associated factor in heart disease and other cardiovascular
conditions.
    While stresses related to the lifestyles of people with such a per­
sonality can contribute to heart disease (as well as to many other dis-
72                                                             A New IB S Solution




                               IBS at a Glance
     IBS stands for irritable bowel syndrome, a functional disorder of the colon
     and intestines that is characterized by:
                    *- Abdominal pain
                    > Diarrhea, constipation, or both
                    > Bloating
                    > Gas (flatulence)
                    > Urgency

        Less well-known features include sleep disturbances, fatigue, fibromyal­
     gia, belching, and occasionally nausea.
        Some people suffering from IBS may be able to tolerate the symptoms
     enough to go about their daily life, but for many people, the pain and
     uncertainty of bowel function can be disabling enough to prevent them
     from working, traveling, and even socializing.
        The incidence of IBS in the United States is quite high, ranging from 10
     to 20 percent of the general population. Similar prevalence rates are seen
     in most other industrialized nations around the world. In the United States,
     IBS is the number-one disorder diagnosed by gastroenterologists (physi­
     cians who specialize in treating gastrointestinal disorders) and is the most
     common chronic medical condition.
        While IBS is not considered serious because its symptoms are not life
     threatening, people with IBS often experience a poor quality of life that is
     worse than that experienced by sufferers of other chronic diseases, includ­
     ing cardiovascular illness.
        The cause of IBS is often misdiagnosed because when the colon and
     intestines are examined (during tests such as colonoscopy), no signs of
     physical damage are visible. For this reason, IBS patients are frequently and
     unfairly told their condition is “all in their head” and are prescribed anti­
     depressants with the expectation that these drugs will help their bowel
     habits along with their stress. Though many IBS patients are understand­
     ably anxious or depressed as a result of their condition, stress and other
     emotional problems are not the primary cause of IBS.
Breaking the Stigma                                                     13


 ease conditions), we now know how important other factors such as
diet, exercise, cholesterol, blood pressure, homocysteine levels, and
even chronic infection are to heart health. Given this new knowledge,
physicians today would be making a big mistake if stress were the
only factor they treated in their heart patients.
     Until recently, another common health problem— peptic, or stom­
ach, ulcer— was also thought to be linked primarily to stress and, to a
lesser extent, the overuse of aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflam­
matory drugs (NSAIDs). For a physician to suggest otherwise was to
risk rejection, ridicule, and even ostracism by the rest of the medical
community. This is precisely what happened to the Australian doctors
J. Robin Warren, a pathologist, and Barry Marshall, a gastroenterolo­
gist, about two decades ago when they first presented evidence that
more than 90 percent of cases of peptic ulcer were caused by a bac­
terium in the gastrointestinal tract later known to be Helicobacter pylori
(H. pylori).
    Since then, not only have their findings been confirmed but anti­
bacterial drugs are now the primary accepted form of treatment for
chronic peptic ulcers, while stress is only addressed in the few cases
in which it actually plays a role. In fact, the website of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention states the following about ulcers:
"W hile stress and diet can irritate an ulcer, they do not cause it. Ulcers
are caused by the bacterium H. pylori, and can be cured with a one- or
two-week course of antibiotics, even for people who have had ulcers
for years." (Source: www.cdc.gov/ulcer/myth.htm)
    As the evidence presented in this book will make clear, bacterial
overgrowth is now being found in a growing number of IBS patients,
and is beginning to be recognized as a potential cause. However, as
happened with Warren's and Marshall's evidence that H. pylori was
the primary cause of peptic ulcers, new research takes time to be val­
idated and accepted by the general medical community and, conse­
quently, patients on a widespread basis. Most physicians still equate
IBS with stress and therefore prescribe a protocol similar to Margaret's
antidepressant regimen, with equally poor results.
    Besides the misunderstanding of the cause of IBS, there are even
more complex reasons why IBS is thought to have psychological
rather than physical causes. Research in IBS was burgeoning in the
1970s, at a time when endoscopy (direct visualization of the intestines
14                                                   A New IB S Solution


with cameras) was in a renaissance. The excitement in endoscopy
came with the introduction of flexible fiberoptic devices, cameras for
looking into the gut. These devices allowed better-than-ever visuali­
zation of the intestines and consequently focused the field of gas­
troenterology on diseases you can see with the naked eye. This was a
big shift from the study of gut physiology (function) as a basis for
diagnosing patients. Since then, practice has become all about scoping,
which is easy and profitable. Possible disease causes were only recog­
nized if they could be visualized with an endoscope; patients with
nothing "visibly" wrong were thought of as "difficult" because find­
ing answers took effort and was not lucrative.
    In addition, stress is known to alter bowel function and frequen­
cy; during times of acute stress, people can often have diarrhea or
experience nausea or other gastrointestinal disturbances. The differ­
ence between such disturbances and IBS is that the former are usual­
ly acute or not long lasting, whereas IBS symptoms are perpetual even
after the stress has passed. Even so, with the recognition of stress
effects on gut function, along with the 1970s endoscopy renaissance,
the stage was set for the subsequent two decades of research associat­
ing IBS with psychology and stress.
    The following scenario, which many of my patients have lived
through before they came to see me, illustrates this.
    After enduring painful gastrointestinal symptoms for a number of
months, a patient finally consented to see a doctor. The doctor per­
formed a physical exam and found nothing wrong with her, then
asked, "Does stress make your bowels w orse?" "Yes," she replied.
"When I am really stressed my symptoms are worse."
    Hearing this, the doctor nodded his head knowingly, saying,
"Your symptoms are due to IBS because it is stress-related. I'm going
to write you a prescription for the anxiety you're feeling."
    "But, doctor," the patient said, "I'm having symptoms even when
I'm not stressed . .. even when I'm on holiday or just relaxing around
the house."
    The woman knows that stress isn't causing her symptoms, only
aggravating them, but the doctor focuses on stress when choosing the
treatment. The woman will start taking the pills prescribed (such as
antianxiety drugs or antidepressants), but her symptoms won't abate.
Frustration then mounts, creating a vicious and unnecessary cycle of
Breaking the Stigma                                                    15


further stress that only makes things worse while the cause of her con­
dition remains undefined.
    Another point that must be made is that the patients, regardless
of the type of bowel condition, only experience a few types of symp­
toms (pain, diarrhea, or constipation). Thus, not only is it important to
rule out stress as the cause of the patient's presenting symptoms, it is
also necessary to rule out other conditions that can appear similar to
IBS, such as colitis, Crohn's disease, gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), infection, inflammatory conditions of the stomach, and even
colon cancer.
    In defense of this work, severe psychological stress, such as sexu­
al or physical abuse, are traumatic events, and associations drawn
between these traumatic events and bowel dysfunction are real. If
nothing else, the research helped physicians identify those with seri­
ous issues that privately haunted many patients. In most cases, this
was trauma that needed healing and appropriate management, and
this effort should never be underappreciated. At the same time, many
of these studies were conducted at centers of excellence for integrat­
ing gastroenterology and psychiatry, leading to selection for a popu­
lation with previous psychological trauma. Recent evidence now
suggests that in the general community of IBS, psychological disor­
ders are no different between people suffering with IBS and those who
are not.


SU FFER IN G IN SILE N C E
There is one particular stress that comes with IBS: the stigma attached
to the disease, which forces patients to suffer in silence. I am speaking
about the reticence of people with IBS to speak about it. Let's face it.
Talking about our bowel habits under any circumstance is hardly a
comfortable thing to do, and is hardly a topic of conversation in polite
society. For most people, doing so would leave them embarrassed,
even shamed. So it's no wonder that people who have IBS are reluc­
tant to tell others, even their own physician in some cases. And, when
they do speak to their doctors about it, once they are reassured that IBS
isn't fatal, all too often they resign themselves to the belief that they
"just have to live with it," and then may not discuss their condition
any further.
16                                                          A New IB S Solution




       The Fallacy and Dangers of Prescribing
              Antidepressants for IBS
 While I am certainly not opposed to the judicious use of antidepressant
  medications under appropriate circumstances, I believe that in many cases
  such drugs are being prescribed when they are, in fact, unnecessary. This
  is particularly true with regard to IBS.
     The conditions for which antidepressants may prove helpful—severe
 and chronic anxiety and depression—are not the cause of IBS. It’s impor­
 tant to note that not all IBS patients suffer from pronounced anxiety or
 depression. In fact, surveys show that the incidence of anxiety and depres­
 sion are no greater among IBS patients than among the general popula­
 tion. Therefore, from my perspective, it usually does not help to prescribe
 antidepressants for IBS, since such drugs are incapable of addressing what
 causes IBS—such as the unchecked overgrowth of bacteria in the gastroin­
 testinal tract. Nevertheless, initial studies of antidepressants showed some
 promise. Although much time was spent suggesting that IBS is part of a
 psychological disorder and this is the basis for antidepressant therapy, spe­
 cific antidepressant drugs do have other properties that make them an
 understandable choice to treat IBS. Specifically, amitriptyline (a tricyclic
 antidepressant) not only helps with anxiety and depression, but also has
 been shown to have properties that help in reducing pain. Furthermore a
 side effect of amitriptyline is constipation, which can help ease diarrhea-
 predominant IBS. These added benefits were also fuel for the argument
 that antidepressants may be helpful.
     A major problem with early studies (especially of antidepressants) in
 IBS was the outcome measures used. One of the few validated scoring sys­
 tems for IBS studies was the IBS-QOL (IBS Quality of Life Score). The
 problem with this and other early scoring systems is that most of the ques­
 tions are related to psychology. To put it simply, using a psychology based
 scoring system in IBS as the outcome measure in a study using an antide­
 pressant suggests that the psychological results should be connected with
 the IBS symptoms.
     To use an analogy, if a patient with IBS was given a blood pressure med­
 ication and, after using it, his blood pressure levels improved, whether or
 not his IBS symptoms improved, would it make sense to say that blood
Breaking the Stigma                                                                17




  pressure medications are a solution for IBS because the pressure dropped?
  O f course not. This is evident from a recent study in which subjects received
  an antidepressant for IBS. This time, the psychology scores were separat­
  ed from the bowel complaint scores. The antidepressants improved psy­
  chological scores but did little for the bowel habits. In other words,
  antidepressants improved the depressive symptoms (which we already
  knew) in IBS patients (it does this for all patients) but did not improve IBS.
  Moreover, in a recent study by a respected investigator, Douglas Dross-
  man, MD, designed to specifically show once and for all that tricyclic anti­
  depressants work for IBS, the results were mostly negative.
      Besides antidepressants’ limited effectiveness in IBS, there is another
  reason for concern about the use of antidepressants to treat people with
  IBS. Such drugs can cause serious side effects and can also prove to be
  addictive over time, making it difficult for patients to stop using them.
  According to Joseph Glenmullen, PhD, an expert in this area, side effects
  of antidepressant medications can include uncontrollable facial and body
  tics, dizziness, hallucinations, nausea, sexual dysfunction, and possible
  neurological damage and permanent structural change to the brain, due to
  how these drugs affect brain chemistry. In some cases, the drugs can even
  lead to suicide and antisocial, even homicidal, behavior. All of these fac­
  tors are why I am so reluctant to prescribe them for my IBS patients.




     Compounding the problem is the social stigma attached to bowel
dysfunction in general and IBS in particular. Comedians poke fun at
it, and even friends and family members may joke about it. Just a few
weeks ago, I happened to watch a popular sitcom. In the episode, the
characters were teasing someone about having IBS. Would your
friends tease you in the same way if they knew you had IBS? We
wouldn't expect to see a television comedy teasing a man with dia­
betes or kidney disease, so why should it be acceptable to make fun of
people with IBS? But it still happens, leading to more reluctance to dis­
cuss this problem.
     Another factor that adds to the public silence about IBS has to do
with the association of IBS with psychological disorders. On first expe­
rience, many patients, when they find the courage to admit they are
18                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


experiencing bowel dysfunction, are then turned off when their physi­
cians subject them to the extensive psychological history as part of the
accepted medical protocol for treating IBS. Many of these patients are
concerned about where such questioning is leading and, rather than
having their answers entered into their medical records, choose to cur­
tail their appointment and continue to suffer in silence. For the alter­
native is to be tagged as a patient with mental health issues: those
issues become part of their medical records for all time.
     An even more ominous scenario is how health-insurance coverage
can be affected. Over the years, I have been told by a number of
patients that listing IBS as one of their health conditions was likely to
compromise their health coverage. Health-insurance providers con­
sider IBS patients to be high users, more likely to go on disability than
patients with other chronic health conditions. As a result, many peo­
ple find that admitting they have IBS can have serious consequences
when it comes to paying for their health care or obtaining disability
insurance.


C O N C LU SIO N
For all of the reasons mentioned in this chapter, public awareness of
IBS and the serious health concerns associated with it remain low,
despite the high incidence of IBS in our country and other industrial­
ized nations. Breaking the silence and stigma that surrounds IBS und,
far more important, empowering the millions of people who suffer
from it with a proven method for treating it are the reasons I wrote this
book. As you read through the remaining chapters, you will begin to
see how new theories (especially the concept of bacterial overgrowth)
will unfold. In Chapter 2, we will take a look at IBS subgroups to edu­
cate you on terminology used by physicians.
                          CHAPTER 2


      Too Fast or Too Slow:
        Understand ins y ° ur
           IBS Symptoms


CC A      Æ Y          was given a diagnosis of IBS, but she has diarrhea
    | % / l three times a day. Meanwhile, I'm constipated most of the
    1 w ■ time. My doctor said I have IBS too. Since our symptoms
are so different, how can we both have IBS?"
     Comments like the one above are quite common. The problem, as
mentioned in Chapter 1, is that the cause of IBS is unknown. Further­
more, there is no blood test to diagnose it. In the absence of such tests,
physicians tend to think of IBS as a "diagnosis of exclusion." A diag­
nosis of exclusion in medicine means that a patient has been examined
(usually with some testing being done) and though the causes of the
symptoms are not readily apparent, the condition is still given a label.
When the symptoms involve changes in bowel function with no iden­
tifiable cause, that label is usually IBS. Since the gut symptoms gener­
ally only include constipation or diarrhea, these too become labels for
IBS, that is, predominantly constipation or predominantly diarrhea.
The categorization is, in fact, more complicated than that.
     Before discussing the categorization in detail, the most important
step in diagnosing IBS is being able to say for certain that a patient
does not have something else. Certain factors determine the scrutiny
needed. In one of the more serious cases, people older than age fifty
with a change in bowel function warrant more intense investigation
mostly due to an increased risk of colon cancer in this age category. For
such patients, colonoscopy (camera visualization of the colon) would

                                   19
20                                                      A New IB S Solution


then be needed. Other considerations include Crohn's disease and
celiac disease in situations where diarrhea is the main feature. The
possibility that there is a more ominous condition can at times weigh
heavily on people. Patients often ask questions such as "Are you sure
there isn't something else wrong besides IBS?" Most clinicians have
examples of patients initially labeled by another physician with IBS;
the patients are later found to have pancreatic cancer or Crohn's dis­
ease. All of the anxiety rests on the fact that there is no definitive test
for IBS. As such, some clinicians even look at the term "IBS" as a
catchall acronym with little meaning, a label that amounts to nothing.
     There is another problem with the use of diagnosis of exclusion as
a determinant of IBS: if you do find what looks like a cause, then it
cannot be IBS. For example, as we began to publish data (discussed
later in more detail) showing that a large proportion of IBS patients
appear to have too much bacteria in the small intestine (bacterial over­
growth), one criticism was "If you find bacterial overgrowth in a
patient, then the patient can't have IBS." When one of my research
papers was published, the journal received a letter from a scientist
who stated that he couldn't fathom how I could have found an asso­
ciation between IBS and bacterial overgrowth, because if bacterial
overgrowth is present then the patients' symptoms can't be due to
IBS. This person is not alone in making this assumption. In other
words, if out of one hundred possible IBS patients, eighty have bacte­
rial overgrowth, now you have only twenty patients with true IBS.
This way of thinking about IBS would never allow researchers to iden­
tify a cause.
     Amidst all this confusion about defining IBS, and now with the
association with bacterial overgrowth, I have had numerous patients
ask me, "W hat should I call my condition? Do I have IBS or am I just
suffering from bacterial overgrowth?"
     I explain that it doesn't really matter what the label is. What mat­
ters is that identification of a treatable condition associated with IBS
provides a way to treat their condition and give them the lasting relief
they desire.
     For those with a longer history of IBS, there is more confusion
since every decade or so it seems to be renamed. In the 1960s and
1970s, it was called "non-specific colitis;" in the 1970s and 1980s, it
became known as "spastic colon." Today, it's primarily known as IBS.
Too Fast or Too Slow                                                    21


More recently, some researchers are leaning toward renaming it yet
again, this time to functional bowel disease, IBS type.
    An even more intriguing spin on IBS was the labeling of sub­
groups, which confuses patients even more. These labels include diar­
rhea- or constipation-predominant IBS. Although I stated above that
IBS is a "diagnosis of exclusion," there needs to be criteria for patients
to meet before the IBS label is applied. The most recent IBS criteria are
called the "Rome criteria," which provide for subcategorization of IBS.
The Rome criteria are so named because a group of gastrointestinal
scientists /IBS experts developed the symptoms list at their first meet­
ing in Rome, Italy. However, these scientists developed the criteria for
research purposes only; therefore, these criteria have never been prop­
erly validated as a method of diagnosing IBS in a doctor's office. In
order to standardize patient enrollment across the world, especially
for drug studies, clinical criteria were still needed. Still, from the Rome
criteria, the subcategorization of IBS into diarrhea-predominant and
constipation-predominant types evolved.
    IBS patients need to know what the Rome criteria are, should their
physicians use it as a diagnostic method. Basically, the Rome criteria
are used for convenience purposes, to label patients, but the criteria
don't really address their symptoms and what might be causing them.
    There were two reasons to subcategorize IBS. The first was because
it was considered hard to explain the research findings occurring in
the 1980s and 1990s without dividing IBS into those two categories. It
was thought that IBS patients were a mixed population, because
patients' complaints were mixed (some had more diarrhea-related
symptoms; some had more constipation). So rather than trying to ex­
plain IBS as a whole, subcategorizing it would help researchers find a
cause more easily. This approach is very similar to taking square pegs
that don't fit into round holes. Instead of investigating more thor­
oughly where the pegs (the research findings) properly belonged, we
simply chose to make the round holes (the clinical findings) square, to
make everything already known fit together.
    The second reason that IBS was divided into the categories of diar­
rhea- and constipation-predominant types had to do with treatment
options. We had medication that made people have constipation, and
this would be good if someone had diarrhea. Likewise, we knew how
to induce loosened stools in people with constipation. For constipa-
22                                                            A N ew IB S Solution




                            The Rome Criteria
     The Rome criteria are divided into two sections:

     1. Patients must have three months of abdominal pain that
        a) May be relieved by having a bowel movement;
        b) Is associated with altered stool frequency; or,
        c) Is associated with altered stool form or consistency.

     2. Patients must have have two or more of the following symptoms for at
        least 25 percent of the time:
        a) A change in stool frequency of either diarrhea (more than three
           bowel movements a day) or constipation (fewer than three bowel
           movements a week);
        b) A difference in stool form (harder or looser);
        c) Passage of mucus during defecation;
       d) Bloating or abdominal distension;
        e) Altered passage of stool (feeling that not all the stool has come out
           after bowel movements, straining, urgency to pass bowel movements).




tion, physicians can suggest fiber, laxatives, and so forth. If diarrhea
is the predominant symptom, then antidiarrhea medications such
as Imodium can be prescribed. In both cases, this approach to drug
therapy fails because it does not address IBS as a whole. IBS is not
diarrhea alone or constipation alone but rather a constellation of
symptoms including pain, bloating, and urgency.
    Based on a published review of the scientific literature that I con­
ducted, there has only been one published paper that validates the
Rome criteria in terms of its ability to diagnose IBS, and it did not
appear until years after the criteria were established. By contrast, the
previous criteria used— the Manning criteria, established in 1978—
were validated by multiple published papers, but this does not solve
the problem because of the previously discussed limitations. Current­
ly, most physicians rely upon the Rome 2 criteria, which were created
by the same scientists following a second visit to Rome; so far there are
Too Fast or Too Slow


no published papers validating the Rome 2 criteria as a valid diag­
nostic method for determining IBS at all.
     Returning to the role that bacterial overgrowth plays in IBS,
patients need to understand that the Rome criteria do not consider
bacterial involvement. So, unless doctors are already familiar with the
research I am sharing in this book, they may not even consider bacte­
rial overgrowth as a possible cause for their patients' symptoms and
therefore may not treat it. As you will discover in later chapters, there
are various types of symptoms resulting from the bacterial overgrowth
that causes IBS (at least in the majority of cases). For example, methane
gas emitted from bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract appears to inter­
fere with the body's elimination process, slowing down the transit
time of waste material to cause constipation. Other people may expe­
rience diarrhea as a result of how the bacterial overgrowth affects
them. Based on our research, my colleagues and I have been able to
categorize the various bacteria involved into subtypes with corre­
sponding symptoms. This reunifies IBS under one causative umbrella
with different symptoms resulting from different physiologic conse­
quences of one cause, and not from different causes. That will be
explained later. For now, I want to emphasize once again that it is not
the symptoms of IBS that matter most, but what is causing them.
Regardless of whether your symptoms are diarrhea or constipation,
don't be confused or upset. Rather, read on to learn how new findings
suggest a potential cause and treatment of IBS.
    In the 1980s, studies showed that in cases of diarrhea-predomi­
nant IBS, the gut is moving too fast, whereas in constipation-predom­
inant IBS, it is moving too slow. This was the first hint that there was
a gut problem in IBS. Work continued in this area while much of the
public attention was focused on psychological aspects of IBS.
    Various pharmaceutical companies succeeded in funding investi­
gations of gut-movement abnormalities in IBS and for practical pur­
poses began the conversion from psychology and the "garbage bag"
diagnosis of IBS to promoting the concept that IBS is a "real" condi­
tion with measurable movement abnormalities.


T H E SE R O T O N IN C O N N E C T IO N
The more that researchers examined the issue of motility as it related
24                                                      A N ew IB S Solution


to diarrhea-predominant and constipation-predominant IBS, the more
they focused their attention on serotonin, a chemical that controls peri­
stalsis— the speed at which waste products and other things move
through the gastrointestinal tract. This is understandable, since 95 per­
cent of the body's serotonin is found in the gastrointestinal tract, with
the remaining 5 percent located in the brain. Moreover, the more sero­
tonin there is, the more aggressively things move through the gas­
trointestinal tract, while the less serotonin there is, the less aggressive
is the rate of peristalsis.
     There are a number of other chemical compounds that also affect
peristalsis and contribute to hypersensitivity in the gastrointestinal
tract, yet researchers initially focused on serotonin, which eventu­
ally led to a number of drugs to mediate gastrointestinal serotonin
levels. The first of these was the drug alosetron, developed by Glaxo
Wellcome (now GlaxoSmithKline), and marketed under the name
Lotronex. This was the first serotonin drug specifically for IBS that
received approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a
treatment for IBS. The intended purpose of alosetron was to slow
down the fast transit time in diarrhea-predominant cases of IBS.
     Alosetron accomplished this by acting as a complete blocker of
serotonin receptor sites along the walls of the gastrointestinal tract,
which is where serotonin causes the chain of events that control gut
movements.
     Alosetron was not without problems. For one thing, it worked not
by slowing down gut movement but by shutting off much of the
movement altogether. This is not something that you want to have
happen, since movement must be present in order for the intestines to
properly eliminate wastes and perform other important digestive
functions. Shutting down gut movement led to severe constipation in
up to 30 percent of IBS patients receiving the drug.
     But the far more serious side effect of alosetron was that it caused
ischemic colitis. This was something that was known prior to the
drug's initial labeling, yet at the time, the reported 1 percent incidence
of this complication was considered low. Ischemic colitis is a serious
medical issue characterized by insufficient blood flow to the colon,
which can cause bleeding into the gut, breakdown of the colon, and
even death. Soon after FDA approval, severe constipation and numer­
ous cases of ischemic colitis began to be reported, although more
Too Fast or Too Slow                                                  25


recent data suggest that ischemic colitis was less common than previ­
 ously estimated due to earlier misdiagnosis. Still, in some cases, the
 side effects were severe enough that colon removal was needed, and
even severe enough that patients died. Eventually, alosetron was
removed from the market. Today, the drug is available in a limited
fashion and is very difficult to obtain.
     Currently, other drugs are being considered by the FDA as sero­
tonin 3 receptor blockers similar to alosetron. One of them—
cilansetron— is in clinical trials, and cases of ischemic colitis have
already been noted. Solvay recently received a "non-approvable"
letter from the FDA regarding this drug. What this means is that
currently there is no serotonin-based class of drugs that has been
shown to be safe for managing the symptoms of diarrhea-predomi­
nant IBS.
     For constipation-predominant IBS, however, the drug tegaserod,
marketed under the brand name Zelnorm, can be beneficial.
Tegaserod's effects are the opposite of alosetron; it is not known to
slow blood flow to the colon and so does not cause ischemic colitis. It
is designed to act similarly to serotonin; in addition, it is not overly
stimulating. It is just strong enough to get the job done, but not strong
enough to cause dangerous side effects. In addition, it can be moni­
tored and safely increased or decreased, depending on the needs of the
individual. In addition, it has demonstrated significant effectiveness in
managing constipation-predominant IBS.
     However, there is some confusion about tegaserod because the
clinical trials primarily involved female patients. In the two pivotal
studies in the United States that demonstrated tegaserod's efficacy,
one study completely involved women, and the other was composed
almost entirely of women. As a result, I've had male patients call me
from their local pharmacy, asking, "Do you know that this drug is only
approved for women?"
     At this point the difference between men and women in IBS needs
to be discussed, because drug therapy appears more effective in
women. The tegaserod studies involved primarily women for two rea­
sons. First, women with IBS tend to respond better to drug therapy
than men. Secondly, epidemiologic studies suggest that more women
than men suffer from IBS. On the other hand, women tend to be far
more likely to see a doctor and report their symptoms, compared with
                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


men, who all too often will keep their symptoms to themselves and are
more reticent to seek medical advice.
    Women, in general, have a more rigorous and earlier health-main-
tenance strategy (breast examination, Pap smears) than men and are
thus more likely to see their doctors on a regular basis. Health main­
tenance in women often begins in their thirties, while most men don't
start having regular prostate exams and colonoscopies until they are
in their fifties.
    One difference between women and men is harder to explain.
Women are far more likely to experience chronic constipation than
men. In my practice, I never see in men the same kind of constipation
that I see in women. An extreme form of constipation is called "colonic
inertia," in which patients have a bowel movement as infrequently as
once a month. It's very rare for men to suffer from constipation to the
same degree.
    Although these gender differences are important in IBS, Novartis
included men in their most recent FDA-approved indication for con­
stipation. This is based on new data and clinical experience where it
appears clear that the response to tegaserod is not gender dependent
and can be used quite successfully in both groups.


M ET O C LO P R A M ID E (R EG LA N ):
P R O C E E D W ITH C A U TIO N
The abovementioned drugs make up part of the class of drugs that
either block or stimulate serotonin receptors. Another drug that is
sometimes used to promote movement of the gut is metoclopramide
(Reglan). Its actions primarily affect the upper part of the gastroin­
testinal tract, not necessarily the colon itself. Metoclopramide is pre­
scribed for a variety of conditions, including IBS, especially of the
constipation-predominant variety. For some time now, I have not pre­
scribed metoclopramide due to the side effects of the drug. Although
the most common side effect is drowsiness or sedation, much more
serious reactions occur such as extrapyramidal side effects, which
include involuntary twitching of the muscles.
    Even more ominously, patients may develop tardive dyskinesia,
a condition characterized by permanent facial contortion. People
who experience tardive dyskinesia after taking metoclopramide will
Too Fast or Too Slow                                                    27


continue to have it to some degree even after they discontinue using
the drug.
    Despite such side effects, a number of physicians and hospital staff
members still prescribe metoclopramide because it is generic and
therefore inexpensive. Because of its affordability alone, many peo­
ple— physicians and patients alike—resist cautions against its use.


P LA C EB O EFFECT?
Another concept that patients may hear about in IBS, and in general,
is the placebo effect. A placebo is a pill that does not contain any active
ingredients, for example a sugar pill. In the placebo effect, a certain
percentage of patients— some estimates are as high as 30 percent—
report improvement in their conditions while taking placebo because
of their eagerness to feel better. This improvement also happens in
combination with simple doctor contact through a study protocol.
     In the case of IBS, the placebo effect has helped foster the belief
that the symptoms are entirely psychological. Though it is true that
some patients do seem to improve after receiving a placebo, this is by
no means proof that their condition was "all in their head." Rather, it
probably means that, as a result of being in the study, they pay more
and better attention to their symptoms, and focus on the good rather
than the bad, leading to their reports of improvement. In addition,
because bowel symptoms fluctuate so much in IBS with or without
treatment, it becomes easy for patients to convince themselves that
they are getting better.
     But there's another reason for the placebo effect in IBS patients
that is due to what is known as "a soft versus a hard end point." Let's
suppose that a drug company wants to determine the effectiveness of
its blood-pressure medication. One way the company could do this
would be to create a study in which patients with high blood pressure
are given an electronic monitoring device to wear in the form of a
bracelet. The electronic bracelet would be connected to a computer.
During the clinical trial, subjects would be divided into two groups—
those who receive the actual blood pressure medication, and those
who receive a placebo drug. Throughout the trial period, the electronic
bracelet would continue to monitor each patient's blood pressure lev­
els and the patients would have no control over the reading the com-
28                                                      A N ew IB S Solution


puter would score during that time. Such a test completely eliminates
the patients' subjective feelings and therefore safeguards against the
placebo effect. Either the blood pressure medication is effective or it is
not. Either way, it is the electronic monitoring device that is reporting
that answer, not the patients. This is what is known as "a hard end
point outcome."
     In determining the effectiveness of IBS treatments, however, such
objective evaluations are missing. Instead, patients fill out question­
naires in which they report whether or not they are feeling better.
Relying on questionnaires makes for a subjective, qualitative outcome
report, not an objective, quantitative report like the one in the exam­
ple above. Patients are asked questions such as: Is your abdominal
pain better? If so, by what percentage has it improved? The answer to
this will depend on many factors such as symptoms that day or gen­
eral mood. Yet physicians rely on such questionnaires to let them
know whether or not their IBS patients are getting better because
currently we lack a quantitative tool for measuring their actual— not
subjective— improvement. This is what is known as "a soft end point
outcome."
     Because of this fact, it is easy to dismiss results of clinical trials
such as those in which subjects with constipation-predominant IBS
were given tegaserod. Those studies found that tegaserod resulted in
a 10 to 20 percent improvement over the placebo, which is statistically
very significant. Yet critics still maintain that tegaserod really doesn't
work any better than a placebo because it "only" increased improve­
ment rates by 10 to 20 percent. The same degree of improvement is
often achieved by drugs commonly used to treat Crohn's disease and
all types of colitis— diseases of the gastrointestinal tract that modern
medicine knows are non-psychological in nature. Or, if they do real­
ize this, critics don't object to it in the same way because physicians
can objectively measure improvements in patients with Crohn's dis­
ease or colitis by determining whether or not physical symptoms like
bleeding and ulcers are improving, in addition to reviewing their
responses on questionnaires.
     The fact is that the effectiveness of drugs used to treat many dis­
ease conditions is on par with that of IBS drugs such as tegaserod in
terms of the separation between placebo and the drugs' effectiveness,
yet we don't criticize the other drugs in the same way. Again, this
Too Fast or Too Slow                                                 29


points to the stigma of IBS's being a psychological condition and the
placebo effect's being a psychological phenomenon.
    Overall, 45 to 60 percent of constipation-predominant IBS patients
who use tegaserod will experience some degree of improvement of
their symptoms, depending upon the patient and the severity of the
symptoms. However, since IBS is not caused by serotonin excess or
deficiency, neither tegaserod nor any of the other drugs discussed in
this chapter that are used to regulate serotonin levels can be expected
to be completely effective. For a truly effective solution, we need to
look elsewhere.


O N T H E R IG H T T R A C K
While none of the drugs discussed in this chapter provide an opti­
mum solution for IBS, they nonetheless represent an important shift
away from the label of IBS as a psychological disorder.
    The research into the development of these drugs has opened the
door for physicians and researchers to begin considering IBS as a
physiological condition with specific physical symptoms that have
nothing to do with a patient's mental or emotional state (aside from
the fact that anxiety and emotional stress can exacerbate the physical
symptoms).
    The fact that there now is interest on the part of pharmaceutical
companies to continue to explore the physiological causes and symp­
toms of IBS represents an important change in medicine's approach to
treating the disease. In addition, because of their interest in fully
understanding IBS, they are also allocating significant amounts of
their research budgets for this purpose. Their commitment to "getting
to the bottom" of the IBS puzzle will have a dramatic impact on our
understanding of the disease.
    Another benefit of this shift on the part of the pharmaceutical com­
panies is that IBS patients are being humanized in current advertise­
ments for drugs such as tegaserod. Today, we are increasingly seeing
ads on television and in magazines that feature real people who are
willing to admit that they suffer from IBS. The positive impact and
hope that these ads provide IBS sufferers should not be overlooked.
These ads go a long way toward once and for all breaking the stigma
that for so long has been such a burden for people with IBS.
30                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


C O N C LU SIO N
Because of the ongoing research, I think we can expect to see another
generation of drugs specifically targeted at treating IBS. In the mean­
time, although none of the current drugs discussed in this chapter pro­
vide a full and complete solution for IBS, they can at least provide a
degree of symptom relief for some patients. This is particularly true of
tegaserod. For real, lasting solutions, we need a more comprehensive
approach to the problem. I will address this solution in Part Two.
                           CHAPTER 3


       Big Brain, Little Brain:
       The Gut’s Nerve Network



        lthough, as we saw in Chapter 1, IBS is most definitely not a

A       condition that is "all in a patient's head," it's important to rec­
        ognize the roles that both the brain and the gut play in IBS.
Research conducted since the 1980s suggests that both the brain and
the gut respond differently in people with IBS than they do in people
who do not have IBS.
    In 1980, researcher William Whitehead published the results of
a study he conducted showing that when a balloon was inflated in
the rectum, IBS patients experienced pain at a less inflated level than
non-IBS patients. Whitehead's research suggested that in IBS patients,
the gut experienced pain at a level different from normal, and that it
did not require as great a stimulus for the pain to be triggered. Put
another way, Whitehead's research showed that IBS patients felt more
pain in the gut than non-IBS patients did. His study initiated the con­
cept of gut hyperalgesia's (heightened pain sensitivity) association
with IBS.
    Based on Whitehead's findings, physicians and researchers began
to consider whether the brains of IBS patients were processing pain
differently than normal. This question led to further research using
brain imaging, some of it conducted by Whitehead and his colleagues,
with additional research conducted by researchers at the University
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). The UCLA researchers employed
PET brain scans, which revealed that certain areas of the brains of IBS

                                    31
32                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


patients were more active during painful stimulation of the rectum
when compared with the control group. The PET scans suggested that
different pathways of activation in the brain occurred in IBS patients
compared with healthy people. This clearly suggested a link between
the brain and IBS, but researchers remained stymied, because they
could not pinpoint what the problem was or where in the brain it was
occurring.
    Adding to the difficulty of finding the answer was that many of
the IBS patients in these studies were using medications such as anti­
depressants, which had been prescribed because their physicians
thought IBS was a symptom of psychological issues. Because such
drug usage was so common among the IBS test groups, it was difficult
to tell whether the altered pathways of activation in the brain were
being caused by IBS or by the medications.
    Adding to the dilemma was research published in the medical
journal Gastroneurology that involved a patient in one of the brain-
imaging studies. In the published study, the author stated that the
patient was narcotic dependent, meaning she was dependent on var­
ious narcotic medications. She complained of symptoms that were
considered to be those of IBS, and the brain imaging showed altered
pathways of activation in her brain. But when this woman was then
given psychotherapy and weaned off the narcotic medications, her gut
symptoms improved and there was a corresponding normalization in
brain activity, as shown by subsequent brain imaging. The fact that
this woman was included in this particular IBS study is remarkable to
me, because I suspect that perhaps she didn't have IBS to begin with.
Rather, her bowel symptoms were probably due to her heavy use of
narcotics.
    Unfortunately, many of the patients in these studies suffered from
similar psychological issues and were also taking medications that
can significantly alter healthy bowel function. As a result, from my
perspective, the study results were less than clear. Given the type of
patients involved, it's very difficult to say for certain what the brain-
imaging studies actually meant or how the data should have been
interpreted. Additionally, no one can say for sure how the patients'
medications influenced the studies' findings. Despite these concerns,
brain-imaging studies have played a dominant part in all subsequent
medical symposia and conferences devoted to understanding IBS,
Big Brain, Little Brain                                                33


 and the role of "brain-gut axis" (the term given to the link between
 the brain and the gut) has remained a major topic of discussion.
     How could gastroenterologists who treat IBS use this research?
 The findings were simply observations, not data that could be used to
 target the cause of IBS and therefore to develop an appropriate treat­
 ment regimen. Moreover, an unfortunate consequence of the focus on
 brain-imaging studies and the brain-gut axis was that it further rein­
 forced the belief that IBS was "all in the patient's head," and therefore
 best treated with antidepressants and other medications used to treat
 psychological or central nervous system conditions. After all, many
 physicians reasoned, if IBS involves the brain, it supports a psycho­
 logical nature to IBS. Actually, this isn't the case. The brain does play
 a role in IBS, but it is a role that is physiological, not psychological.
     Among the research that makes this clear is that of Michael Ger-
shon, PhD. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, instead of focusing on the
brain or the gut directly, Gershon conducted research on the nerves
that intervene between them. More specifically, on the nerves that
communicate from the gut to the brain and central nervous system. As
a result of this research, we now understand the connection between
serotonin and the speed of movement through the gut. This research
later led to the development of drugs that stimulated serotonin recep­
tors to relieve constipation (tegaserod) or blocked serotonin receptors
to relieve diarrhea (alosetron). Through his research, Gershon further
showed that serotonin can influence the rate at which the food by­
products pass through the gastrointestinal tract. As we discussed in
Chapter 2, too much serotonin can cause diarrhea whereas too little
serotonin can result in constipation. Regulating serotonin levels through
various medications has become a popular way for physicians to try
to help their IBS patients. However, I am unaware of any published
studies that indicate that disruptions in serotonin levels are a primary
factor in IBS.
     Even so, one of the interesting aspects of the research by Gershon
is how it confirms that the gut, or gastrointestinal tract, has a nerve
network that, while integrated with the brain, is also highly inde­
pendent of it. In fact, research suggests that the gastrointestinal tract
actually contains more nerve tissue than the brain does. Philosophi­
cally, this makes sense, because the gastrointestinal tract is the most
evolved organ system in the body, since it is also the oldest organ sys-
34                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


tem found in nature. Worms, for example, have a highly developed
gastrointestinal tract, whereas they lack kidneys and brains, having a
rudimentary neural network. Every type of animal has a gastroin­
testinal tract. Overall, the brain is the newest system of the body, espe­
cially its frontal lobes that control higher mental functioning such as
speech, language, and reasoning. By comparison, the gastrointestinal
tract is the oldest and most evolved, as well as possibly the most com­
plex, organ system; it has its own extensive nerve network, which can
function independently. In fact, if all nerve connections to the brain
were removed, the gastrointestinal tract would continue to function on
its own.
     An example of this is vagotomy, a medical procedure that involves
the administration of pharmaceutical drugs to prevent function of the
vagus nerve, which helps to control motor and sensory function. Even
when the vagus nerve is deactivated by this procedure, the gastro­
intestinal tract continues to function independently.
     In normal human function, because the gut's neural network is
integrated with that of the brain, the networks communicate with each
other. While there is no question that the brain contributes to gas­
trointestinal tract function, the gut is also able to work independent­
ly. For this reason, Gershon has labeled the brain and the gut "big
brain" and "little brain," respectively. Some scientists, however, argue
that it might be more proper to designate the gut as the "big brain,"
because of how old it is, in terms of evolution, and how capable it is
of independent function.
     Building upon the research of Gershon and other researchers, over
the last five years, Yvette Tache, PhD of UCLA has significantly con­
tributed to our understanding of cortisol-releasing factor (CRF), a
hormone that is produced in the brain in response to stress. Whenever
we experience stressful events, or continue to be stressed over unre­
solved past events, the brain produces CRF, which in turn produces an
increase in adrenaline. The increased adrenaline levels provide us with
the extra energy we need to deal with the stress. Tache's research
shows that when CRF is produced, it triggers three physiological
effects within the gastrointestinal tract. First, colon function speeds
up, meaning that the colon will eliminate stool more frequently. Sec­
ond, stomach function slows down so that the stomach doesn't empty
its contents as often. The third effect caused by elevated CRF is that the
Big Brain, Little Brain                                                35


small bowel starts to have fewer cleansing waves, which could favor
bacterial overgrowth.
     Based on my own experience in treating IBS, I do not think that
stress and its resulting increase in CRF levels cause IBS, but I do think
that stress can modify IBS symptoms through the mechanism of CRF.
I also believe that other factors are involved during times of stress that
can also exacerbate IBS symptoms; more research is required before
these factors can be fully understood. But to say that stress is causing
IBS is not accurate, as the vast majority of IBS patients can testify. My
IBS patients, for example, when I first consult with them, all point out
that their IBS symptoms remain present regardless of whether they
are stressed out or completely relaxed. So, though I do believe that
stress can make IBS symptoms worse at times through CRF and other
factors, it does not cause IBS.
     I would estimate that while most Americans are stressed in some
way, not all of them are suffering from IBS, even though stress can
affect their gut function. This is an important point. In addition, we
need to recognize that stress is often an aspect of activities we enjoy,
including our jobs. Therefore, my role as a physician is not to tell
my patients— with IBS or otherwise— to get a less stressful job than
they currently have, because they may enjoy what they do for a living.
(Managing stress effectively and appropriately, on the other hand, is
important.)


C O N C LU SIO N
With regard to stress and IBS, people should be aware of new med­
ications that are being developed that will act as CRF antagonists,
meaning they will block this aspect of the stress response (elevated
CRF levels) in the gut. Currently, a number of researchers and phar­
maceutical companies are conducting research in this area, and we can
expect to see public announcements of studies related to it in the
months and years ahead.
    If the drugs being developed work as intended, they may prove
useful in their ability to block the bacterial overgrowth that otherwise
results from the slowing of the small intestine cleansing waves during
increased CRF production. It still remains to be seen whether such
drugs will be able to accomplish this. What is most important in treat-
36                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


ing IBS is not reducing factors that inhibit these cleansing waves, but
actually stimulating them to do their job more effectively while at the
same time eliminating the bacterial overgrowth that is the primary
cause of IBS. This is something that my colleagues and I are able to
do quickly and effectively using the Cedars-Sinai treatment protocol,
which you will read about in Part Two.
                          CHAPTER 4



               Guess Who’s
             Coming to Dinner
   Food Poisoning and Parasites

            hen Francis was thirty-five years old, he vacationed in

W           Hawaii. At the time, he was perfectly healthy, with no
            abnormal bowel habits. During the third day of his vaca­
tion, after grabbing a quick bite to eat at a fast food eatery, he experi­
enced feelings of indigestion but ignored them, eager to enjoy some
more time on the beach. The next day, however, Francis woke up feel­
ing nauseous and had to rush to the bathroom to vomit. This was fol­
lowed by diarrhea that ruined the rest of his vacation. Instead of being
able to enjoy himself, he was forced to remain close to his hotel room,
going to the bathroom eight to ten times a day.
     Francis thought his symptoms were from food poisoning from
his meal at the fast food eatery. Eventually, his diarrhea symptoms
tapered off, but soon after he returned home, he began to experience
other gastrointestinal disturbances. Primarily, at first, he was bothered
by bloating and abdominal distension. Then he experienced a chron­
ic pattern of bloating on a daily basis accompanied by alternating
patterns of constipation and diarrhea.
     When Francis first came to me for help with his symptoms, he was
forty-five years old and had endured his symptoms for ten years. Noth­
ing he had tried prior to consulting with me had given him more than
temporary, fleeting relief. Listening to Francis explain his symptoms, I
knew that he was suffering from IBS. When follow-up diagnostic tests
failed to confirm any other condition, I told Francis what he had.

                                   37
38                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


      He said, "It was my damned trip to Hawaii! Everything was fine
 until I ate at that eatery. Ever since then, my gastrointestinal tract's
 been a mess!"
      Sally, another of my patients, was exposed to the amoeba parasite
 after she drank water during a trip to Latin America. Soon thereafter,
 she developed chronic bowel complaints that she suffered from for
 years. Eventually, the amoeba was discovered and treated, but her
 bowel symptoms did not fully improve. Subsequent diagnostic tests,
 which were repeated more than once, revealed that the amoeba was
 gone, yet her bowel symptoms continued unabated. When Sally first
 consulted with me, she was fifty-five years old and had endured her
 symptoms—which were also due to IBS— for seven years. Like Fran­
 cis, she distinctly recalled her trip as the time her symptoms began. "If
 only I'd avoided drinking the water!" Sally said ruefully. Fortunately,
today Francis and Sally are both symptom-free after following the IBS
protocol that you will read about in Part Two. What Francis and Sally
have in common with as many as 20 percent of all IBS patients is that
their symptoms were preceded by an acute episode of food poisoning
 (Francis) or traveler's diarrhea (Sally).
      Investigators in Europe conducted the initial research that sug­
gested that food poisoning and certain types of parasitic infection (pri­
marily amoeba, Cryptosporidium parvum, and giardia, each of which
can be contracted by drinking contaminated water) may precipitate
what is known as "post-infectious IBS" (IBS that occurs after an epi­
sode of food poisoning or parasitic infection). They discovered this by
examining patients who had documented cases of food poisoning,
also known as acute gastroenteritis (in some cases, the food poisoning
was so severe that the patients had to be admitted to the hospital), or
acute infectious diarrhea.
      None of these patients were found to have IBS at the time. But
later, well after the incriminating infection (food poisoning or parasite)
had either resolved itself or been successfully treated (determined by
stool samples showing that the infectious organism was no longer
present), the patients went on to develop IBS. In all, the researchers
discovered that 7 to 31 percent of patients with either acute gastroen­
teritis or acute infectious diarrhea subsequently developed IBS.
     When the researchers presented their initial findings, they were
met with a certain degree of skepticism by some IBS specialists, who
Guess W ho’s Coming to D inner                                        39


still considered IBS to be primarily a psychological condition. While
not rejecting the findings outright, these specialists questioned whether
the symptoms the patients developed after suffering with food poi­
soning or parasites were really those of IBS. Perhaps, they suggested,
the actual reason for the patients' ongoing symptoms was that the
infectious agent had somehow damaged the gastrointestinal tract and
the damage had yet to heal.
     To address such questions, the researchers conducted a follow-up
study, which they published in 2002. In this study, they observed that
57 percent of the people who developed IBS after initially suffering
from food poisoning still met all the Rome criteria for IBS six years
later. This clearly indicated that their symptoms were indeed consis­
tent with chronic IBS. Food poisoning is very common, yet not every­
one who experiences food poisoning develops IBS. Conversely, could
most of the IBS cases have been caused by this type of acute infection?
Unfortunately, the answer to that question currently remains unan­
swered, because most people who experience food poisoning, which
usually resolves itself within a week or so, never see a doctor for their
problem.
     What we now know is that a significant percentage of these peo­
ple do go on to develop IBS, and it remains possible that many cases
of IBS may be secondary to food poisoning or certain types of parasitic
infection. But the only way to answer this question would be for every
known case of food poisoning to be tracked at its onset to see what
happens after it resolves. That would be difficult to achieve.
     In addition, there are still many IBS specialists who continue to
reject the causal link between food poisoning and IBS. Although they
accept the possibility that food poisoning causes IBS, they label such
incidents as a subcategory of IBS— that is, post-infectious IBS. Their
argument in support of their position is that, among a sampling of one
hundred IBS patients, perhaps twenty of them can be identified as
post-infectious IBS patients, while the remaining eighty cannot. Still,
the significance of cases of IBS that are subsequent to food poisoning
should not be overlooked. For example, in my own practice, when I
ask IBS patients if they can remember what I have termed a "herald­
ing episode" or "heralding event," 20 to 30 percent of any group of
patients state that they can recall exactly when their IBS started. In
some cases, they remember the specific date it began. They tell that
40                                                              A N ew IB S Solution




     Risk Factors for Developing Post-Infectious IBS
     Although it remains unclear as to whether all cases of IBS stem from food
     poisoning and/or parasitic infection, more than ten years of scientific
     research have clearly established that a significant percentage of IBS
     patients first developed their symptoms after they were exposed to such
     heralding events. Here are some of the most important factors you must
     know to minimize your risk of developing post-infectious IBS.

     »■ Campylobacter—O f all infectious agents (bacteria, parasites, and virus­
     es), this bacterium has the greatest likelihood of initiating post-infectious
     IBS. As it is primarily transmitted through contaminated food or fecal-oral
     transmission, you can drastically minimize your risk of being exposed to
     Campylobacter by taking care to avoid food poisoning (see Tips For Avoiding
     Food Poisoning on page 44).

     >- The severity of the heralding event—Research has also discovered that
     the intensity of the heralding event, such as the duration and severity
     of traveler’s diarrhea, has a direct correlation to the likelihood of post-
     infectious IBS. For example, someone whose diarrhea symptoms last for
     two weeks or more is at a significantly greater risk for IBS than someone
     whose symptoms last for only a day or two.



that they remember eating at a particular restaurant or recall a trip
that resulted in food poisoning. Ever since those heralding events,
they report, they've suffered with IBS. In every case, the heralding
event they recall was also very pronounced: it was the worst diarrhea
of their life, or they remember that there was blood in their stool, or
something equally significant and dramatic.
    Research into post-infectious IBS and its link to heralding events
such as food poisoning or parasitic infection continues. Because of
the results, which began to be reported in 1994, researchers started
to investigate different types of bacteria and other infectious agents to
discover if there was a single agent that was causing post-infectious
IBS, just as we now know that the H. pylori bacteria is the most com­
mon cause of ulcers. If that were the case, it might be possible to vac­
cinate against the agent or at least disrupt its ability to initiate IBS. But
Guess W h o’s Coming to D inner                                                     41




  » The degree of vomiting during the heralding event—Following exposure
  to food poisoning, the less one vomits, the more likely one is to develop
  post-infectious IBS. This is especially true when lack of vomiting is accom­
  panied by diarrhea. Certain food-poisoning bacteria produce vomiting,
  others diarrhea. It appears that the bacteria that principally affect the small
  bowel and colon are connected with IBS, ar.d not those that principally
  affect the stomach.

  > Gender—In a study published in 2002, it was found that women who
  got food poisoning were much more likely to develop post-infectious IBS
  after they experienced food poisoning compared with men. The reason for
  this is not yet known, but this may explain why more women have IBS than
  men. In the meantime, if you are a woman, you should especially take good
  care to avoid food poisoning.
  > Age—Overall, young adults are more prone to post-infectious IBS fol­
  lowing a heralding event than are older people.
  > Stress level—Even though it’s now been shown that IBS is not a stress
  or psychological disorder, research appears to indicate that a person’s
  stress level or psychological state at the time of the food poisoning may
  affect progression of post-infectious IBS.



it turned out that this isn't the case. Instead, researchers have found
that infections from a number of bacteria can lead to IBS, including
Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella, as well as parasites such as
amoeba and giardia. In some cases, certain types of viruses have also
been shown to cause post-infectious IBS. In 2004, a study was pub­
lished showing that, among bacteria, Campylobacter was found to
be most likely to cause post-infectious IBS. Campylobacter is primar­
ily contracted from food poisoning and tends to make most people
very sick.
     Despite the large amount of research conducted in Europe since
1994 that established a strong link between infectious organisms and
post-infectious IBS, until recently most IBS researchers and physicians
in the United States continued to operate under the supposition that
IBS is primarily caused by stress and that its symptoms are "all in a
42                                                      A N ew IB S Solution


patient's head." In fact, as of this writing, in the United States the first
investigations into post-infectious IBS have only been in the last year.
U.S. physicians, scientists, and researchers who specialize in IBS are
more than a decade behind their European colleagues when it comes
to examining this association.
    A dramatic example of how food poisoning can cause post-infec­
tious IBS occurred in May 2000 in the Canadian town of Walkerton,
Ontario, and was described by a highly respected researcher, Dr.
Stephen Collins. Due to heavy rainfall that caused runoff from farm­
lands, fertilizer and other contaminants ended up in the town's wells
that provided its water supply. As a result, approximately 2,300 of
the tow n's 4,500 residents experienced acute food poisoning after
drinking the water. Of these, six people died and another sixty-five
had to be hospitalized. Three years later, approximately 1,000 of
the 2,300 people who experienced acute gastroenteritis still suffered
from chronic gastrointestinal tract disorders consistent with post-
infectious IBS. That's nearly 50 percent of the population in question.
Such an incident makes the link between food poisoning and other
heralding events and post-infectious IBS very difficult to ignore.


IN FLAM M A TIO N A N D P O ST -IN FE C T IO U S IBS
In 2000, European researchers took our understanding of how food
poisoning can lead to post-infectious IBS to the next level. They
accomplished this by taking biopsies of the rectums of IBS patients
known to have had food poisoning as the cause of their IBS. Their
research showed that there were increased white blood cell counts in
the lining of the rectums of patients with post-infectious IBS. This indi­
cates that even after the heralding event is resolved and the food-
poisoning bacteria are gone, inflammation remains in the rectum.
    While the elevated white blood cell counts in the rectum are high­
er than normal, the degree of inflammation is so modest as to appear
inconsequential to most pathologists. It is possible that the cell count
elevation is due to the fact that these patients continue to suffer from
diarrhea months and years after the initial heralding event, and that
is what is irritating the rectum. In a follow-up study, IBS patients
whose symptoms were not deemed to be post-infectious also showed
elevated white blood cell counts, although not to the same extent as
Guess W ho’s Coming to D inner                                         43


that exhibited by post-infectious IBS patients. This could be because the
non-post-infectious IBS patients included people whose IBS symptoms
were constipation predominant. This might possibly have skewed the
findings to indicate a higher elevation in post-infectious IBS patients
than was actually the case. This elevated white blood cell count in the
rectal lining is now becoming the basis for a new set of studies look­
ing at the consequences of inflammation in IBS.
    In people who experience food poisoning but do not develop post-
infectious IBS, the body initiates an inflammatory response, including
elevated white blood cell counts, in order to attack and rid itself of the
invading microorganism. Once this is accomplished, the inflammatory
response is stopped and the body returns to normal. This is what hap­
pens with the majority of people who experience acute gastroenteri­
tis—the inflammatory response does its job and they completely recover.
    Why complete recovery does not occur in people who then devel­
op post-infectious IBS is a question still in need of answers. There are
a number of possibilities that could account for this, including a per­
son's genetics, immune response (responding too fast or too slow to
the invading pathogens), the type of bacteria and/or toxins, and other
factors. Although determining which factors play a role remains an
important focus for our better overall understanding of IBS, equally
important is the now-established fact that heralding events such as
acute gastroenteritis account for a high percentage of all IBS cases.
Therefore, it makes good sense to take measures to avoid food poi­
soning in the first place.


C O P IN G W ITH FO O D PO ISO N IN G
Before researchers and physicians were aware that food poisoning
could lead to post-infectious IBS, it was commonly thought that the
symptoms of food poisoning, especially diarrhea, should be allowed
to run their course so that the body could rid itself of the offending
toxin or pathogen.
    In the majority of cases, this approach leads to a complete reso­
lution of food-poisoning symptoms with no further problems. How­
ever, knowing what we do now about the link between food poisoning
and post-infectious IBS, "letting nature take its course" may not always
be the wisest approach. This is especially true of diarrhea that lasts for
44                                                            A N ew IB S Solution




               Tips for Avoiding Food Poisoning
     Food poisoning is becoming an increasingly common occurrence due to
     the fact that people are traveling and eating out more than they used to.
     Statistics show that 12 percent of all travelers will experience food poi­
     soning as soon as they leave their home city or town. It makes no differ­
     ence whether they travel to Philadelphia or Mexico: 12 percent of all
     travelers are guaranteed to get food poisoning.
        For travelers who do travel outside of the United States, especially to
     Third-World countries, the percentage is much higher, perhaps as high as
     50 percent.
        Symptoms of food poisoning can vary, ranging from onset within 30 to
     60 minutes after eating (usually in cases of chemical contaminants in food)
     to up to 12 to 48 hours in cases of bacterial food poisoning. Many cases of
     diarrhea are due to food poisoning, although this may not be recognized at
     the time. Other symptoms of food poisoning include nausea, stomach pain,
     vomiting, and, in very severe cases, collapse and shock from dehydration.
        To minimize your risk of contracting food poisoning, do the following:
     > Avoid eating at street vendors, which are common in foreign countries.
     > Avoid salad bars where food can be set out all day and exposed to a
     host of potentially food-poisoning microorganisms.
     > Heat, Heat, Heat. Hot food is safe. Room temperature is an absolute no.
     > Avoid eating raw fish, including sushi.




more than a day or two because, as we discussed earlier, the longer the
initial period of diarrhea lasts, the more likely a person is to have his
or her food-poisoning symptoms eventually progress to post-infec­
tious IBS. If we can shorten the period of diarrhea related to food poi­
soning, we will be able to reduce the number of people who go on to
develop IBS because of it.
    The most common method used by people to treat their diarrhea
is an over-the-counter drug such as Imodium. While such drugs can
bring a certain degree of relief, all they are doing is masking the diar­
rhea symptoms, not addressing their root cause— the offending bacte-
Guess W ho’s Coming to D inner                                                      45




  > When dining out, select restaurants that have a reputation for cleanli­
  ness. Code violations for restaurants that violate good sanitary standards
  are often posted in local newspapers.
  > When eating poultry that has been frozen, be sure that it is fully thawed
  before cooking to minimize the risk of salmonella poisoning. For the same
  reason, also avoid eating raw eggs.
  »- At home, wash all fruits and vegetables thoroughly before eating. A vari­
  ety of nontoxic food detergents are now available for this purpose, as well.
  You can find them at your local health food store.
  > When traveling, especially to Third-World countries, avoid eating uncooked
  vegetables, including salads, as these foods are often sprayed and washed
  with local water. All vegetable dishes should be cooked and served hot.
  > Peel the skins of all fruits before you eat them. If you can peel it, you can
  eat it. If not, forget it.
  > Also avoid the use of ice cubes, including those added to beverages.
  Travelers forget that ice cubes are often made with local water.
  > As much as possible, drink brand-name bottled water, and use the same
  water when brushing your teeth. Also be sure that the water bottle is prop­
  erly sealed before you open it. If bottled water is unavailable, you can use
  iodine tablets to treat the water before you use it.
  > When bathing or showering while traveling, avoid getting water in your
  mouth.




ria. For this reason, studies are now underway to examine the efficacy
of using antibiotics during times of acute gastroenteritis. This is not an
official medical recommendation at this time, but depending on the
studies' results it may become so in the future. At the same time, some
pharmaceutical companies are currently investigating the use of
antibiotic drugs as a prophylactic (preventive) measure for protecting
against food poisoning. I believe that in the near future, under certain
circumstances and depending on what regions of the world travelers
intend to visit, the use of such preventive antibiotics may, in fact, be
medically recommended.
46                                                    A New IB S Solution


     A good example of such a drug is rifaximin (Xifaxan), which is
being marketed in the United States by the pharmaceutical company
Salix Pharmaceuticals.
     Rifaximin is very effective for both preventing and treating trav­
eler's diarrhea and is approved by the FDA for this purpose. One of
the reasons rifaximin is so appropriate for food poisoning is because
it is a 99.6 percent non-absorbed antibiotic, meaning that instead of
moving into the bloodstream and other parts of the body as many
antibiotics and other drugs do, rifaximin remains in the gastrointesti­
nal tract where it protects against and targets the invading bacteria
known to cause traveler's diarrhea. Recently, rifaximin was shown to
reduce not only the length but also the intensity of an acute attack of
traveler's diarrhea (the length was reduced by 50 percent). Because of
this, rifaximin is now being tested to determine its usefulness in pre­
venting IBS altogether by attacking the disease at its origin— the acute
food-poisoning illness. The results are likely to be very promising. If
rifaximin works in this way, it will markedly improve our ability
to reduce the instances of IBS and more effectively treat it when it
does develop.
     One of the other reasons why it's important to minimize the dura­
tion of acute gastroenteritis may involve how food-poisoning bacteria
in the gastrointestinal tract interfere with the cleansing wave of the
small intestine. We'll be discussing this aspect of IBS in the next chap­
ter. For now, suffice it to say that when this cleansing wave of motili­
ty becomes disturbed, it allows overgrowth of the bacteria associated
with chronic IBS, even after the food poisoning has resolved.
     Research has shown that these bacteria can affect the cleansing-
wave action of the small intestine. Studies in Europe showed that
Campylobacter disrupts the muscle and nerve connections of the small
intestines.
     Currently, I am working with my colleagues at Cedars-Sinai
conducting research to determine whether the toxin produced by
Campylobacter completely disrupts the cleansing wave by paralyzing
the muscle and nerve connections, thus setting the stage for IBS.
     Like all other species, bacteria are primarily concerned with their
own survival and propagation. They accomplish both by colonizing
their host, or the body of the patient. There, they multiply and then
pass themselves on in stool, giving themselves a chance to infect
Guess W h o’s Coming to D inner                                        47


patient number two. In order to do this, the bacteria need to stop the
small intestine from cleaning itself out. In some people, this effect on
small intestinal movement is only temporary, but in others, the effects
may be permanent, thus setting the stage for bacterial proliferation
and the chronic symptoms of IBS. Based on the routine clinical success
I am having in improving IBS in my patients by addressing bacterial
overgrowth, I believe that this bacterial process is the primary cause
of IBS.


G O O D B A C TE R IA , BAD B ACTERIA?
EXA M IN IN G T H E FA CTS
 These days, given their popularity, no discussion of the relationship
 between bacteria overgrowth and IBS can avoid mention of so-called
 "good" bacteria, also known as probiotics, and their potential benefits
 as an aid against so-called "bad" bacteria. Many of my patients ask me
 about this, and I tell them there really is no such thing as "good" and
 "bad" bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract. The concept of "good bac­
 teria" was coined by the companies that manufacture probiotics. I
 don't mean to imply that these products cannot be useful at times; I
 have had some patients tell me that after they used probiotics their IBS
 symptoms improved. I can't argue with that.
     At the same time, IBS, as well as the health of the gastrointestinal
tract in general, is far too complex to support a simple claim that cer­
tain types of bacteria will solve the problem. As an example, consider
the common bacteria E. coli. Most people are well aware of how path­
ogenic strains of E. coli can cause serious gastrointestinal problems.
Every time there is an outbreak of food poisoning at a fast food restau­
rant, it is the dreaded E. coli. What most people don't realize is that
non-pathogenic strains of E. coli are some of the best bacteria for main­
taining the health of the lining of the intestines, yet no manufacturer
is going to market those strains. In the normal gut, E. coli is one of the
most common bacteria; bad things happen only when a special toxic
strain is in the food. Still, this fear of E. coli prevents manufacturers
from making any probiotics with this type of bacteria.
     The two most popular forms of probiotics are Lactobacillus aci­
dophilus and Bifidobacterium bifidum. Both have been shown to exist in
lesser amounts in patients with IBS compared with healthy people
48                                                      A New IB S Solution


when stool samples from both groups are tested. Proponents of such
bacteria seized on such findings as evidence that IBS and other gas­
trointestinal disorders are due, at least in part, to deficiencies of these
types of probiotics. If this was the only problem caused by IBS, then
supplementing with these types of probiotics should do much to
reverse symptoms. Unfortunately, the research into this area does
not bear this out. One recent double-blind study conducted by Dr.
Eamonn Quigley, for instance, found that there were no measurable
improvements among IBS patients who were given Lactobacillus aci­
dophilus, but there was some improvement among patients who were
given Bifidobacterium.
     In addition, other studies also indicate that probiotic supplements
may not always be safe. There have been case reports of children who
were given large doses of Lactobacillus acidophilus to help treat their
diarrhea who suffered from negative side effects. In one case, a child
developed endocarditis (infection of the heart valve) as a result of over­
consumption of Lactobacillus acidophilus. There have also been reported
cases of blood infection in people who consumed too much probiotic.
     This doesn't mean that such bacteria have no benefit. The real
question concerning bacteria is not whether they are "good" or "bad,"
but where in the body they are located. As in real estate, when it comes
to so-called good and bad bacteria, the most important issue is "loca­
tion, location, location." If the bacteria are where they are supposed to
be in the body and are doing what they are supposed to do, then they
are okay. But if they migrate into the wrong place, then they can cre­
ate problems. For example, E. coli in the stool is perfectly okay, but if
it migrates into the bloodstream and gets into the urine to cause a uri­
nary tract infection, it is potentially very dangerous. In another exam­
ple, bacteria migrating into the small intestine can create problems, as
so often happens in cases of IBS.
     At the same time, there is no question that certain types of bac­
teria (assuming they are not overconsumed), such as Lactobacillus
acidophilus and Bifidobacterium bifidum, can have beneficial effects on
the health of the gastrointestinal tract. One study from Europe showed
that these two bacteria can, in fact, increase the cleansing-wave activ­
ity of the small intestine, which may be beneficial in IBS. The problem
lies with our inability to understand the beneficial effects of bacteria
acting together, because they are too complex.
Guess W ho’s Coming to Dinner                                                     49


    At any given time, there is interplay between 300 and 500 differ­
ent types of bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract. That's how many
species of bacteria are found in human stool; in fact, the bacteria com­
pose 50 percent of total stool weight. Therefore, it is unlikely that one
type of bacteria alone, or even in combination with five or ten other
types of bacteria, can compensate for the effects of 300 to 500 bacteria.
The gut bacterial composition is an infinitely complex mixture of sym-




                   Fast Facts About Bacteria
                     and the Human Body
  >- Bacteria are one of the oldest living life forms on Earth.

  »• There are far more bacteria cells in the human body than there are
  human cells.

  5* Bacteria are often complex, in terms of their ability to adjust to their
  environment.

  s» Half the total weight of all stool in the colon is made up of bacteria.

  >■ At any given time, 300 to 500 different types of bacteria are interacting
  in the human gastrointestinal tract.

  > Scientists have so far been able to culture approximately only 20 percent
  of these types of bacteria. Currently, we do not know what the remaining
  80 percent of bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract grow on, so culturing
  them is impossible.

  »• Each human has his or her own fingerprint of types and quantities of
  bacteria. This fingerprint was likely determined at a very young age, when
  the immune system was figuring out what was already in the body (there­
  fore, don’t react to it) and what was not (therefore, if it ever comes in, we
  must get rid of it).

  > Studies have shown that taking an antibiotic will disrupt the fingerprint
  of bacteria of a person, but after a short period of time, the exact finger­
  print of types and numbers of bacteria will return.
50                                                   A New IB S Solution


biotic bacteria, and altering one or two in this large number seems
unlikely to be a curative treatment for any gastrointestinal disease.


A W O R D A B O U T PA RA SITES
As we discussed at the beginning of this chapter, certain types of par­
asites, such as amoeba (Entamoeba) and giardia, can also cause post-
infectious IBS. Some health specialists consider parasitic infection to
be a more common (yet undiagnosed) condition than many doctors
and patients realize. Some experts estimate that as many as 60 percent
of all Americans are infected by parasites at some point in their lives.
    The symptoms of parasitic infection usually appear within 72 to
120 hours following exposure. Symptoms include diarrhea (which can
be explosive and/or watery), constipation, pronounced fatigue, nau­
sea, stomach cramping, and vomiting, most of which are similar to
IBS symptoms. Therefore, when treating IBS patients, it is important
to consider whether or not parasites might be a culprit. If they are,
then treating the parasite may resolve the problem. In order to mini­
mize risk of parasitic infection, follow the same tips for avoiding food
poisoning provided earlier. Also don't drink water from rivers or
streams during hiking and camping trips, and don't eat raw or under­
cooked meat or fish.
    Being around pets or other animals can also increase the risk of
parasitic infection. However, the types of parasites that can be con­
tracted from animals, such as hookworms, nematodes, and pinworms,
do not cause the inflammation associated with IBS.
    Nonetheless, I have had a few of my IBS patients tell me they
believed their IBS symptoms were due to parasites they got from their
pets even though testing showed that no such parasites were present.
If you suspect you suffer from parasitic infection, see your doctor, who
can schedule the proper tests for you.


C O N C LU SIO N
Based on more than a decade of research demonstrating the link
between acute gastroenteritis and post-infectious IBS, it is becoming
increasingly clear that IBS can be precipitated by a case of acute gas­
troenteritis. This chapter has provided information on how this occurs
Guess W ho’s Coming to D inner                                    51


and how to prevent acute gastroenteritis. How food poisoning triggers
IBS is not known. There is some evidence that food poisoning may
damage small bowel movement in a way that may set the stage for
IBS. The next few chapters will explore new developments of how nor- |
mal colon bacteria can cause IBS by excessively colonizing the small
bowel, which is due to a failure of small intestinal cleansing contrac­
tions between meals.
                         CHAPTER 5



              The New Culprit:
            Bacterial Overgrowth



    n order for you to fully understand why my colleagues at Cedars-

I   Sinai and I are convinced that the primary cause of IBS is bacteri­
    al overgrowth, let's take a look at how our understanding of IBS
has evolved.
    Earlier, we discussed the Rome criteria, which are still used as a
diagnostic tool by most physicians who treat IBS. When the Rome cri­
teria were developed, bloating, abdominal distension, and flatulence
(gas) were excluded from the main criteria for IBS and designated
as minor. However, prior to the Rome criteria, the research that led to
the development of the Manning criteria showed that bloating and
abdominal distension were significant features of IBS. However,
because no one at that time knew how to treat or explain bloating, the
experts who developed the Rome criteria relegated bloating to the list
of symptoms considered minor criteria. The Rome experts instead
focused on constipation, diarrhea, and abdominal pain as the primary
symptoms of IBS. In part, this may have been due to anticipated stud­
ies to test treatment of constipation, diarrhea, and abdominal pain
with new drugs targeting the serotonin receptor (see Chapter 2).
    Further confusing the situation were studies conducted in the
1970s and 1980s, which tried to determine whether or not bloating and
distension were actually major symptoms of IBS. Most participants in
these studies reported having both of these symptoms, but neither
were found upon examination. At best, the examiners found modest

                                  53
54                                                              A N ew IB S Solution


protrusions of the stomach, not serious protrusion as might be caused
by bowel obstruction. Nonetheless, test subjects continued to insist
that as the day progressed their bloating increased and their stomachs
became more distended.
    Around this time, researchers also began to explore whether or not
flatulence was a major symptom of IBS. Again, many IBS patients
reported that it was, stating that they frequently passed gas, that it
had a foul odor, or that they had gas buildup that they had trouble
passing, causing their stomachs to become distended. Again, there
were no conclusive findings; the researchers remained uncertain about
what role these factors played in IBS. Then, in 1980, the research of Dr.
Whitehead was published, showing that most IBS patients experi­
enced more sensitivity to pain in the rectum and intestinal tract com­
pared with non-IBS patients. At this point, the researchers concluded
that IBS patients didn't really have gas and distension to any signifi­
cant degree, but just felt as if they did because of their hypersensitiv-




             Bloating, Distension, and Flatulence:
            The Complaints Doctors Hate to Hear
     Although bloating, abdominal distension, and/or flatulence are quite com­
     mon, they rank among the complaints most likely to make your physician
     privately groan. This does not mean that your doctor is not sympathetic to
     your problems, but that doctors hate to hear such complaints because,
     until now, there was very little that they could do for them. While there are
     various drugs advertised on television (just watch the evening news) that
     claim to treat such problems, they actually do not. Take drugs like sime­
     thicone, for example, which is widely advertised as being able to reduce gas
     symptoms. The truth is that virtually no one who uses such products expe­
     riences any kind of relief. All that these products do is break the gas bub­
     bles; they do not reduce the amount of gas in your system. Unlike other
     gastrointestinal symptoms such as constipation and diarrhea, both of
     which are relatively easy to treat, bloating, distension, and flatulence are
     much harder to treat and are therefore a source of great frustration for
     physicians and patients alike.
The N ew Culprit                                                     55


ity to pain. However, the researchers had very little real data to sup­
port this conclusion.
     This situation began to change when researchers in Europe, Lea
and colleagues, developed an electronic belt that could be worn for
twenty-four hours, which measured the continuous girth of the stom­
ach. The results showed that IBS patients truly did have far more dis­
tention than normal. Though they awoke with stomachs that were
relatively normal, over the course of the day and night, as they ate
their meals, their stomachs became increasingly distended, and then,
during sleep, regressed back to normal by the next morning. This
research showed that this abnormal distention was a typical pattern
among IBS patients.
     Around this same time, additional research by Dr. T. S. King also
demonstrated higher-than-normal levels of gas produced among IBS
patients compared with healthy people. The average human produces
many liters of gas each day. However, most people do not pass all of
the gas out of their rectums, but reabsorb it and expel it as they
breathe. Prior to King's research, researchers in the 1970s and 1980s
were unable to detect any significant difference in rectal gas expulsion
between IBS patients and healthy controls. This was because they
didn't account for the fermenting gas that was getting reabsorbed and
expelled in the breath. King, therefore, placed IBS patients and con­
trols in sealed chambers, where he measured all bacterial fermenting
gases that were expelled from both normal breathing and through the
rectum. He found that the IBS patients produced approximately five
times as much gas of a bacterial source compared with the control
group. Though King proved that IBS patients did produce far more
gas from a bacterial source than normal, he concluded that the reason
was that they had too much bacteria in the colon.
    King's research was followed by a study group from Japan (Koide
and colleagues), which took x-rays of the stomachs of IBS patients and
compared them to x-rays of stomachs of test subjects in a control
group. Koide's group discovered that IBS patients had significantly
greater amounts of gas in their small intestines.
    Based on these three studies, which showed that IBS patients over­
all have excessive bloating of the stomach, produce far greater levels
of gas from a bacterial source than healthy people do, and have exces­
sive accumulations of such gas in the small intestine, my colleagues and
56                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


I at Cedars-Sinai's GI Motility Program reasoned that the primary cause
of IBS more than likely was excessive bacteria in the small intestine.
     Even after our research validated our hypothesis, we still faced an
uphill battle in terms of gaining acceptance for the primary link
between bacterial overgrowth and IBS from the majority of physicians
who treat IBS, a situation that still exists to this day. The reason for
this resistance, in addition to the still-held belief that IBS is primarily
a psychological condition, is that IBS continues to be a diagnosis of
exclusion.
     As we discussed earlier, a diagnosis of exclusion means that the
diagnosis was made only if nothing else appears to be wrong, that
is if no diagnostic tests show any results. Here's how the diagnosis
of exclusion works when it comes to the refusal of physicians and
researchers to accept bacterial overgrowth as the primary cause of IBS:
While bacterial overgrowth has been shown to occur in significantly
higher levels among IBS patients than in non-IBS patients, those who
believe the diagnosis of exclusion claim that signs of IBS can't show
up on a test, so the bacterial overgrowth cannot indicate IBS.
     How do we know that IBS is not a diagnosis of exclusion? To
understand how, consider again the relationship between the bacteria
H. pylori and peptic ulcers. Although the original researchers whose
work proved that H. pylori is the principal cause of peptic ulcers were
roundly criticized and ridiculed when they first presented their find­
ings in the 1980s (at which time peptic ulcers were also seen as being
primarily due to stress), today it is accepted that the researchers were
right. Therefore, to say that evidence of bacterial overgrowth in peo­
ple with IBS means that they don't have IBS is exactly akin to saying
that evidence of H. pylori in people with peptic ulcers means they
don't have peptic ulcers either; they have H. pylori disease. In the lat­
ter case, mainstream physicians and researchers today would dismiss
this. Yet the diagnosis of exclusion, which resists identifying bacterial
overgrowth as the cause of IBS, continues to be debated. This book
was written to help change this perception.


BREA TH T E S T S CO N FIRM
B A C T E R IA L O V ER G R O W TH IN IBS PA TIEN TS
Physicians have used breath tests for quite some time, but my col­
The New Culprit                                                       57


 leagues and I at Cedars-Sinai (including my mentor, Dr. Henry C. Lin)
 were the first to use them in a published study that confirmed the IBS-
 bacterial overgrowth link. This came about in the 1990s, as we began
 noticing how often IBS patients told their physicians that their condi­
 tion improved when they were given antibiotics. One example of this
 was Susan, a thirty-seven-year-old woman who had suffered with IBS
 symptoms for six years. After having a root canal, Susan was placed
 on a course of antibiotics for two weeks. During that time, she told her
 primary-care physician that her IBS symptoms had greatly improved
for two months, only to flare up again. Susan wondered if there was
a connection between the antibiotics and the temporary improvement
in her IBS symptoms, but her physician dismissed the idea as a sim­
ple coincidence.
     Based on our knowledge of greater incidence of bacterial over­
growth among IBS patients, as well as reports such as Susan's where
IBS symptoms significantly improved during antibiotic treatments,
my colleagues and I began to suspect that not only was bacterial over­
growth a potential cause of IBS, but that the proper course of antibi­
otic treatment might be effective. We began to notice how many IBS
patients tested positive for elevated levels of bacteria during breath
tests at our center, and also how many of those patients reported that
their IBS symptoms improved when they used antibiotics. In many
cases, the symptoms improved to the point where the patients were
feeling normal again.
     We decided to study the IBS patients who came to our center for
breath tests, to determine how many tested positive for bacterial over­
growth. In the first study, we screened over 200 patients; 76 percent
tested positive for bacterial overgrowth. These patients were then
treated with antibiotics, and afterward returned for follow-up breath
tests. Much of the patients' bacterial overgrowth either significantly
reduced or returned to normal levels, and in each case, there was also
a corresponding, remarkable improvement in their IBS symptoms. We
published the results of this study in the American Journal of Gastroen­
terology in 2000. When this study was published, the results were con­
sidered controversial, and many researchers criticized it for not being
a controlled double-blind study. In addition, some researchers ques­
tioned whether the results were due to the fact that Cedars-Sinai's GI
Motility Program receives visits from patients who are sick, with the
                                                        A N ew IB S Solution


bacterial overgrowth simply being a result of their illness. Finally,
some researchers questioned our findings, saying we had not proved
that the bacteria were in the small intestine because we had not cul­
tured them from the gut. Whenever bacteria are believed to be respon­
sible for a condition, the way to prove it is to culture the bacteria from
a sample from the site of the condition.
    We took this last criticism very seriously, and we decided to study
the gut bacteria of IBS patients. We discussed this with some of the
nation's top experts in infection and bacteria, including normal gut
bacteria, but were discouraged because at the time there was no
method for growing 80 percent of the 400 species of normal bacteria
that reside in the small intestine, the site of the bacteria associated with
IBS. To culture only the remaining 20 percent would not provide
enough information. Furthermore, there currently was no way to col­
lect samples of bacteria from the small intestine without contaminat­
ing the instrument used to collect them as it passes through the mouth,
throat, and so forth. And, even if collection without contamination
were possible, the gut bacteria cannot live in the presence of oxygen,
and would immediately die once they were exposed to oxygen when
removed from the patient.
    Given such problems, my colleagues and I instead decided to
repeat the breath tests as a double-blind study. We recruited patients
from the general community instead of from our clinic, and we con­
ducted breath tests that were completely blinded, meaning that we
did not know if the patients had bacterial overgrowth or not. Their
breath was collected and sealed, and then the patients were random­
ly given neomycin (an antibiotic) or a placebo that they took for ten
days. Within a week to ten days after they completed their course of
antibiotic or placebo treatments, the patients returned for another
breath test and a réévaluation of their symptoms. The test results
revealed that 84 percent exhibited bacterial overgrowth based on the
breath test. The patients who then received neomycin had a 35 percent
improvement of their symptoms, compared with only 11 percent in
the placebo group. This difference was statistically significant. Even
more remarkably, among the patients whose breath tests returned to
normal as a result of using neomycin, approximately 75 percent
also experienced improvement in their IBS symptoms, which was one
of the highest improvement rates ever demonstrated in IBS patients.
The N ew Culprit                                                      59


This was based on a composite score of the commonly accepted symp­
toms associated with IBS, such as constipation, diarrhea, and abdom­
inal pain. We published this study in 2003 in the American Journal of
Gastroenterology.
    Although culturing is difficult, two studies, conducted by Drs.
Simren and Robson, found that 12 percent of IBS patients have colon
bacteria in excess of 100,000 per milliliter all the way up to the duo­
denum, the highest part of the upper bowel. While the 12 percent in
this study is not the same as the 84 percent found in our study, the dif­
ference is that the duodenum is the part of the gastrointestinal tract
farthest away from the colon (source of bacteria). In addition, those
who tested positive for bacterial overgrowth in the duodenum also
had the worst IBS symptoms, suggesting that the closer we get to the
colon, the higher the percentage of bacterial overgrowth. The 12 per­
cent finding, in other words, is really the bare-minimum percentage of
bacterial overgrowth detectable among IBS patients.
    Although breath tests had already been in use for a number of
decades prior to the tests we conducted, my colleagues and I at
Cedars-Sinai were the first researchers to use them in the clinical man­
agement of IBS. Our studies, as well as later studies conducted by
other researchers, have demonstrated the fact that bacterial over­
growth is the primary factor in cases of IBS. The improvement IBS
patients demonstrate when they follow the Cedars-Sinai protocol for
treating IBS by normalizing bacterial levels cannot be disputed. This
improvement is something that we are now achieving on a routine
basis.


W H A T C A U SES B A C T E R IA L O V ER G RO W TH ?
The human body is designed to prevent bacterial overgrowth and has
various mechanisms for doing so. To keep the wrong kind of bacteria
out of the gastrointestinal tract, the immune system identifies and
attacks invading bacteria as well as other pathogens, such as viruses
and fungi. To prevent bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine, the
primary defenses are stomach acid, which kills bacteria that enters
through the mouth (with a few exceptions, such as H. pylori, which can
survive stomach acid), and bile juices secreted by the gallbladder and
pancreas.
60                                                                 A N ew IB S Solution




                How Breath Tests Are Performed
     Breath tests have been used by physicians as a diagnostic tool for decades.
     Breath testing itself is very simple, and there are three common ways to
     perform breath tests as a means of diagnosing bacterial overgrowth-a
     xylose breath test, a glucose breath test, and a lactulose breath test. Xylose,
     glucose, and lactulose are all sugars.
         The test that we principally use at Cedars-Sinai is the lactulose breath
     test, because lactulose is the only sugar not absorbed by the body, mean­
     ing that it is able to travel all the way through the small intestine, which is
     approximately 15 feet long. By contrast, glucose, the body’s principal ener­
     gy source, is completely absorbed by the body within the first one or two
     feet of the gastrointestinal tract; while xylose is less absorbable than glu­
     cose, it has varying absorption rates depending on a person’s height and
     body size, making the xylose test difficult to control. Therefore, if you are
     trying to detect bacteria located in the lower half of the small intestine,
     only the lactulose test is capable of doing so.
         Patients taking this test drink a sample of lactulose syrup. Then, every
     fifteen minutes over a three-hour period, samples of their breath are col­
     lected. Once you drink the lactulose syrup, it quickly comes in contact with
     the bacteria in the small intestine. The bacteria then eat and digest the
     lactulose, fermenting it and producing different types of gases—carbon
     dioxide, hydrogen, methane, and sometimes hydrogen sulfide. Only the
     hydrogen and methane are detectable in the breath, so they are the gases
     measured to determine the levels of the various bacteria in the gut.
         In healthy people, the largest concentration of bacteria is in the colon.
     It takes approximately two hours from the time the lactulose syrup is con­
     sumed to the time it reaches the colon and starts to be consumed by the
     bacteria there. This means that healthy people should not experience an
     increase in bacterial gas production during the breath test until about two
     hours or more after drinking the sugar.
         If the breath test indicates that the bacteria levels are rising within nine­
     ty minutes or less, and in concentrations of twenty or more parts per mil­
     lion, that is a strong indication that bacterial overgrowth exists in the small
     intestine, because the syrup solution reaches the small intestine before it
     reaches the colon.
The N ew Culprit                                                                   61




      An additional point to consider if you decide to have a breath test is the
   type of instrument your medical practitioner uses. The device that is used
   most extensively is known as a QuinTron gas chromatograph. For the most
   accurate reading, I recommend the QuinTron SC, which is capable of
   measuring both hydrogen and methane, and correcting for possible con­
   tamination of the sample by using carbon dioxide from the breath to
   ensure that the breath samples that are collected are done so correctly. To
   locate a physician in your area who uses the QuinTron device, contact
   QuinTron Instrument Company, 3712 West Pierce Street, Milwaukee, Wl
   53215. Phone: 800-542-4448; Website: www.quintron-usa.com.



     In addition, a valve called the ileocecal valve, which is shaped like
a little sphincter, prevents bacteria that belong in the colon from
moving backward into the small intestine. Then there are the lympho­
cytes that line the lining of the gastrointestinal tract. Lymphocytes are
white blood cells that are an important component of the immune sys­
tem. They play an essential role in identifying and attacking foreign
pathogens. Except for the bone marrow, where most lymphocytes are
produced, the lining of the gastrointestinal tract has a higher concen­
tration of lymphocytes than any other part of the body. They prevent
bacteria from penetrating the lining of the intestine and traveling to
the rest of the body.
     Another important mechanism that prevents bacterial overgrowth
is a special cleansing action of the small intestine; the cleansing wave.
When we are not eating, this cleansing wave is designed to occur
every ninety minutes. It is supposed to be deactivated only when we
are eating a meal, when the body is digesting food and absorbing the
nutrients. Once these are absorbed into the bloodstream, the leftover
food particles need to be cleaned out of the small intestine so that the
body can be ready for its next meal. The cleaning process begins in the
stomach and then moves through the small intestine as the cleansing
wave pushes the leftover food particles into the colon for elimination.
Ideally, you should have approximately nine cleansing waves of this
nature each day.
     Researchers have known since 1978 that if you don't have normal
62                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


cleansing waves throughout the day and night, bacterial overgrowth
can occur. In the 1980s, studies were done in which test subjects were
given morphine, which inhibits cleansing waves. Over time, these test
subjects developed bacterial overgrowth.
    Similarly, in the studies my colleagues and I conducted at Cedars-
Sinai, we demonstrated that IBS patients with bacterial overgrowth
have had on average a 70 percent reduction in cleansing-wave activ­
ity when compared with healthy patients.
    This evidence ties into the heralding events such as food poison­
ing that we discussed in Chapter 4. The data that my colleagues and
I are compiling strongly indicates that certain food-poisoning toxins
significantly inhibit the cleansing wave. This makes sense, because the
bacteria that cause food poisoning need to secure a foothold in the
small intestine, replicate, and colonize their new environment. The
bacteria will need to inactivate the cleansing-wave process so that they
don't get expelled. Research in Europe shows that this is exactly what
happens with the Campylobacter toxin, a very common type of food
poison. It disrupts the muscle and nerve connections of the small
intestine, stopping the wave, thus allowing the Campylobacter bacteria
to colonize there. Therefore, if there is no other cause of the cleansing-
wave inhibition, future research may confirm that it is due to food
poisoning.


M ETH A N E A N D H YD R O G EN
A N D T H E IR R E LA T IO N SH IP T O IBS
One of the questions my colleagues and I faced when we published
our findings linking bacterial overgrowth to IBS was how those find­
ings explained the various subtypes of IBS. As we discussed in Chap­
ter 2, IBS appears in seemingly opposite ways. Some IBS patients
experience frequent diarrhea as an IBS symptom, and little to no con­
stipation (diarrhea-predominant IBS). Others are primarily consti­
pated and experience little to no diarrhea (constipation-predominant
IBS). Still others experience constipation and diarrhea in approxi­
mately equal measures.
    The degree to which an IBS patient experiences constipation or
diarrhea is determined, at least in part, by the types of gases produced
by the bacteria that have colonized the small intestine. In the breath
The N ew Culprit                                                              63




               Other Factors That Can Cause
                   Bacterial Overgrowth
  Although the absence of cleansing waves is known to cause bacterial over­
  growth, it is vital to consider other known causes. Among them are:

  > Adhesions on the bowel due to prior abdominal surgery.

  > Surgery that alters the anatomy of the small intestine.

  > Endometriosis (abnormal growth of the uterine lining) that extends into
  the bowel.

  > Crohn’s disease, especially if accompanied by strictures (narrowing of
  the stomach).

     Insufficient production of pancreatic enzymes and/or impaired pancre­
  atic function (often caused by chronic inflammation of the pancreas).

  5» Lack of stomach acid.

  »■ AIDS/HIV-related bowel disease.

  > Aging.

  > Impaired functioning of the ileocecal valve, which connects the small
  intestine to the bowel and prevents bacteria, undigested food particles,
  and other substances in the colon from traveling backward into the small
  intestine.



tests my colleagues and I conducted, we found higher-than-normal
concentrations of two gases— methane and hydrogen— in most of the
patients who also tested positive for IBS. Methane and hydrogen are
not produced by humans, but by bacteria as part of their fermentation
process. We examined close to a thousand IBS patients: in nearly every
case, patients whose breath tests showed only higher methane con­
centrations were constipation predominant. These findings led us to
conduct a series of animal studies in which methane was infused into
the small intestine. When this was done, transit time in the animals'
intestinal tract was reduced by approximately 70 percent, indicating
64                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


that bowel function slows down in response to methane interacting
with the gastrointestinal tract. We concluded that methane is a pri­
mary factor responsible for constipation in IBS patients.
    In our most recent study, my colleagues and I further demonstrat­
ed this by showing that successful treatment of constipation in IBS
patients directly depends on the elimination of methane, presumably
by eliminating methane-producing bacteria. This is done through the
judicious use of antibiotics, which we will discuss in far more detail in
Chapter 6. To be sure that the bacteria are really eliminated, a follow-
up breath test must be performed. This study showed that constipa­
tion will not completely resolve unless the bacteria that produce
methane are eliminated.
    Interestingly, one way in which methane causes constipation is by
causing the bowel to become hyperactive, which my colleagues and I
demonstrated in additional studies.
    We then reexamined our IBS patients and found that those whose
breath tests showed higher concentrations of methane had twice as
much small intestine movement as did those whose breath tests showed
higher concentrations of hydrogen. However, this movement is coun­
terproductive; instead of moving forward to allow proper elimination
of waste products, it moves backward and thus slows down the elim­
ination process.
    By contrast, IBS patients with higher concentrations of hydrogen,
as opposed to methane, gas in the small intestine experience more
diarrhea. However, unlike methane, hydrogen appears not to affect
small intestinal physiology, meaning that it doesn't trigger diarrhea
symptoms in the same way that methane causes symptoms of con­
stipation. Rather, the degree of diarrhea appears to be related to the
quantity of hydrogen-producing bacteria in the small intestine. In
addition, studies that my colleagues and I conducted examining IBS
patients with fibromyalgia-like symptoms— something I discuss in
more detail in Chapter 8— found that patients whose IBS is associat­
ed with fibromyalgia also have the highest concentrations of hydro­
gen levels. Again, this does not mean that the hydrogen is causing
the fibromyalgia symptoms, only that the higher the hydrogen lev­
els are, the more bacteria there are, and the sicker these patients tend
to be.
    In concluding this section, I want to again stress that the bacteria
The N ew Culprit                                                         65


that are producing methane or hydrogen in the small intestine are not
necessarily pathogenic or "bad" bacteria. Rather, they are bacteria that
should be in the colon but have migrated back into the small intestine
because the small bowel cleansing wave is not operating normally. In
healthy people, these bacteria can be found in the small intestine, but
only in minute, insignificant quantities, and the action of the cleans­
ing waves prevents them from growing beyond those levels.
    But if these waves stop, or other factors occur (see page 63), these
bacteria start to replicate without being properly eliminated, eventu­
ally to the point where IBS can occur.


A U N IF IED T H E O R Y :
H O W B A C T E R IA L O V ER G R O W T H R E LA TES T O
P R EV IO U S T H E O R IE S A B O U T T H E C A U SE O F IBS
As I discussed in Chapters 1 to 4, various other theories have been
used by physicians and researchers to explain how IBS occurs. Each of
those theories can now be better understood, given what we now
know about the link between bacterial overgrowth and IBS. For exam­
ple, the question of IBS subtypes— that is, IBS that is either too fast
(diarrhea predominant) or too slow (constipation predominant) can
now be explained by the amount of methane that is being produced
as a result of bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine.
    As Chapter 1 made clear, for many years IBS was considered to be
a condition that was primarily caused by psychological factors, espe­
cially stress. I don't believe that stress is the cause of IBS, and increas­
ingly, IBS experts across the nation are now coming to that same
conclusion. However, recent research has demonstrated that stress can
cause CRF (corticotrophin-releasing factor) to increase in the brain (see
Chapter 3). Interestingly, when this happens, three things occur in the
gastrointestinal tract: The colon empties faster, at times causing diar­
rhea; the emptying of food from the stomach slows down, causing
people to not want to eat; and cleansing waves become inhibited.
Therefore, though stress does not cause IBS, the increased CRF that is
associated with stress can exacerbate IBS symptoms.
    Additionally, future studies may show that food poisoning may
herald IBS by causing cleansing-wave inhibition, thus setting the stage
for bacterial overgrowth to occur. Because stress already inhibits the
66                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


cleansing waves, food poisoning occurring at the same time is likely
to make matters worse.
    Before concluding, let's examine the issue of gut speed and hyper­
sensitivity. Animal studies spanning decades have long demonstrated
that bacteria, once they become relocated in the small intestine, can
cause the gut to move faster, secrete excessive fluids, and increase the
release of a chemical compound known as "Substance P." Substance P
is now believed to be the chemical that increases hypersensitivity in
the gastrointestinal tract and lowers the pain threshold in the rectum.
In addition, when bacterial overgrowth is present in the small intes­
tine, the release of serotonin is also increased. This affirms the belief
of IBS researchers who feel that serotonin plays a role in IBS. It defi­
nitely does, but the mechanism may be secondary to the bacterial
overgrowth itself.


C O N C LU SIO N
What all of this means is that the previous theories related to the cause
of IBS were not wrong. In a nutshell, all theories are part of a larger
picture that includes food poisoning leading to poor gut-cleansing
movements, leading to bacterial overgrowth, leading to substance P
release (gut hypersensitivity) and serotonin release (increased speed of
the gut/diarrhea) with stress worsening IBS by further inhibiting
cleansing waves. A vicious cycle.
    In the next part, we will begin to address how to make things bet­
ter by discussing management strategies.
       PART TWO



       The IBS
   Treatment Plan ♦♦



Putting It All Together
                          CHAPTER 6


                    Help at Last:
       The Cedars-Sinai Protocol
            for Treating IBS

         ow that you understand how and why bacterial overgrowth is


N        the primary cause of IBS, it's time to learn how to treat IBS
         most effectively. The goal of your treatment program should
be not only to reduce the volume of bacterial overgrowth, but also to
eliminate it completely, and then to restore the small intestine's cleans­
ing-wave mechanism. In this way, not only will you resolve your IBS,
but you will also prevent its recurrence. I call this comprehensive treat­
ment approach the Cedars-Sinai protocol for treating IBS, because my
colleagues and I developed the protocol at the Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center in Los Angeles, California.
    In this chapter, you will discover how and why the Cedars-Sinai
protocol for IBS works, as well as the in-depth screening tests our IBS
patients undergo when they first come to my colleagues and me. These
tests help to rule out any other underlying conditions. In addition, you
will receive diet tips and a one-week menu plan that you can start
immediately, which will help to reduce the bacterial load in your gas­
trointestinal tract, thereby helping to ease your IBS symptoms. Lastly,
you will read how the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS effectively helped
one of my IBS patients, who will recount her successful outcome. Keep
in mind that her success story is only one of many.


G E T T IN G ST A R T E D : T H E T E ST IN G PH ASE
When an IBS patient comes to see me, I first test the patient to deter­

                                   69
70                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


mine whether any other factors are contributing to the symptoms. This
is something I recommend that all physicians do for patients who
complain of IBS-like symptoms, because proper medical screening and
diagnostic tests can save lives. Because the clinic I work in is a spe­
cialized center for IBS, many of my patients have already undergone
such tests before they come to see me, but if they have not, the fol­
lowing are some of the tests I recommend.


Blood Testing
Blood tests are performed to screen for anemia and inflammation. Ele­
vated inflammation levels are indicated by an inflammation marker in
the blood called "erythrocyte sedimentation rate" (ESR). Erythrocytes
are mature red blood cells, which play a role in transporting oxygen
to, and carbon dioxide from, the cells, organs, and tissues, and which
also help regulate the acid-alkaline balance of the blood. The ESR test
measures the speed at which erythrocytes settle and can help deter­
mine if inflammation is present in the body.
     Blood tests are also useful in measuring overall blood chemistry,
as well as kidney function, and can also indicate other "red flags" for
other health imbalances.


Celiac Testing
Celiac disease is a gastrointestinal disorder that can mimic IBS. Its
symptoms include faulty digestion of food, malabsorption of nutri­
ents, and diarrhea. Celiac disease is caused by sensitivity to gluten,
which is found in wheat. People with celiac disease often experience
an improvement in their symptoms simply by eliminating all wheat
and wheat products from their diet. Screening for celiac disease is per­
formed using a blood test, or alternatively, the gold standard would
be to perform a biopsy of the lining of the small intestine.


Colonoscopy
A standard of practice is that all people fifty years old or older have
a colonoscopy to check for possible colon cancer and to screen for
polyps in an effort to prevent colon cancer. Any patient older than the
Help at Last                                                                 71


age of fifty with changes in bowel habits should be considered for
colonoscopy. This is important since the incidence of colon cancer
increases with age. In patients younger than fifty, colonoscopy can rule
out diseases such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis (both condi­
tions of inflammation in the intestine or colon), which can have symp­
toms that mimic IBS. Colonoscopy for patients younger than fifty
years old should be considered on a case-by-case basis.


Thyroid Testing
I also ask my patients to have their thyroid levels tested to ensure that
their thyroid function is normal. Elevated or reduced thyroid levels
can often contribute to diarrhea or constipation, respectively.

     All of the above are tests that my colleagues and I insist that all of
our IBS patients undergo because we want to make sure that their
health maintenance is properly addressed. If you are experiencing IBS-
like symptoms, you should have your physician consider these or sim­
ilar tests as well.
     Once I have eliminated all other potential factors that can cause




     RECOMMENDED TESTS                        WARNING SIGNS
                                           (That This May Not Be IBS)
  1. A good history and physical
     (nothing can replace this)          1. Blood in stool

  2. Complete blood count (CBC)          2. Constant diarrhea (The
                                            bowel habits in IBS usually
  3. Erythrocyte sedimentation
                                            fluctuate.)
     rate (ESR)
                                         3. Fever
  4. Celiac blood testing
                                         4. Diarrhea at night
  5. Stool studies for blood,
     and culture for pathogenic          5. Weight loss
     bacteria and parasites              6. Age over fifty years (consider
  6. Endoscopic examination                 colonoscopy)
     (on a case-by-case basis)           7. Vomiting
72                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


IBS-like symptoms, I have our patients take the breath test that was
explained in Chapter 5. Usually, they will see me later on the same day
the breath test is performed, so that I can go over the results with them
and outline an appropriate course of treatment. If the breath test indi­
cates bacterial overgrowth, the next step is to have them begin the
Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS.


TH E PRO TO CO L
Based on the findings of the breath test, I am able to determine
whether or not my patients have bacterial overgrowth. If they test pos­
itive for bacterial overgrowth, I place them on a course of antibiotic
treatment for an initial ten-day period. The use of antibiotics can erad­
icate bacterial overgrowth, regardless of whether patients test positive
for methane gas, in which case their IBS symptoms are most probably
constipation predominant, or for hydrogen gas, in which case their
IBS symptoms can vary.
     There are two antibiotics that I recommend for treating the bacte­
rial overgrowth associated with IBS. The first drug, which is the one I
most commonly prescribe, is called rifaximin (trade name Xifaxan),
which is manufactured by Salix, a pharmaceutical company that is
actively researching effective ways of treating IBS. I might also pre­
scribe neomycin.
     I recommend rifaximin and neomycin for two reasons. The first
reason is because both drugs have been shown to be effective for
eradicating bacterial overgrowth. The second reason, which helps
explain why they are so useful in treating intestinal bacterial over­
growth, is because only very small amounts of these drugs are
absorbed by the bloodstream. In the case of rifaximin, 99.6 percent of
it stays in the gastrointestinal tract, while approximately 95 percent
of neomycin does the same. This is an important point. Unlike other,
more absorbable antibiotics, instead of being dispersed through the
bloodstream to other areas of the body, rifaximin and neomycin
remain inside the gastrointestinal tract, making them more effective.
In addition, the non-absorbability of both rifaximin and neomycin
makes them far less likely to cause side effects in other parts of the
body.
     In both drugs, there are minimal side effects. Therefore, for exam-
Help at Last                                                        73


pie, female patients are far less likely to develop vaginal yeast infec- I
tions, and neither drug is likely to affect bacteria in other areas of
the body, thereby avoiding the problem of bacterial resistance, which
is a m ajor reason that so many other drugs, over time, lose their
effectiveness. The safety and effectiveness of both rifaxim in and
neomycin makes them ideal choices for treating intestinal bacterial
overgrowth.
    This is especially the case with rifaximin, as shown by a study that
my colleagues and I conducted regarding its effectiveness for treating
IBS. In the study, which involved eighty-seven patients, there were
two remarkable findings. First, the study demonstrated that the
patients' IBS symptoms significantly decreased after a single ten-day
course of rifaximin. More important, the symptom improvement last­
ed for two months after treatment. This is the first treatment for IBS
that does not require continuous administration of drug to be effec­
tive, and this provides proof that we are treating a cause of IBS.
    One issue about rifaximin is that it is FDA approved for traveler's
diarrhea but not for IBS. This can be a problem for insurance coverage
of the drug. ITopefully, once the insurance carriers realize that this is
a single ten-day course rather than continuous therapy (not to men­
tion fewer healthcare provider visits for IBS patients), they will be
more apt to cover the prescriptions.
    Once the ten-day course of antibiotic treatment ends, I then
administer a follow-up breath test for my patients, which is usually
scheduled within five days after they have taken their final dose of the
antibiotic. Before proceeding to the next phase of the protocol, the fol­
low-up breath test has to be negative, meaning that the levels of
methane and/or hydrogen gas have returned to normal.
    If the follow-up breath test is negative, patients should be free or
nearly free of their symptoms. However, if the follow-up breath test
shows incomplete eradication of the bacteria, the patient is likely to
have only partial symptom relief.
    In cases where the patient reports a 90 to 95 percent improvement
in their symptoms, the treatment can be considered a success, and
there is no need to prescribe a further course of antibiotics, regardless
of the breath test results. But in cases where the improvement is only
60 to 70 percent and breath test improvement is partial, I will discuss
with patients the possibility that another course of antibiotic treatment
74                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


will result in further improvements. If they agree, I will prescribe a
combination of rifaximin with neomycin. In such cases, their initial
improvements usually become even more pronounced. As a word of
caution, if the breath test becomes normal after the antibiotic treat­
ment but there is no improvement in symptoms (or only a slight
improvement), one should consider another diagnosis. For example,
it is common for patients with Crohn's disease to have bacterial over­
growth because this condition can cause partial blockage of the small
intestine and decrease drainage. In addition, celiac disease has even
been associated with bacterial overgrowth.
     Once the bacterial overgrowth has been eradicated to a satisfacto­
ry degree, the next step of the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS involves
restoring the normal function of the cleansing waves of the small
intestine. This is crucial because proper function of the cleansing
waves minimizes the likelihood of future episodes of bacterial over­
growth. My colleagues and I accomplish this by having our IBS
patients take either erythromycin, in a dose of 50 milligrams, or Zel-
norm, in a dosage range of 2 to 6 milligrams, at bedtime.
     Both of these products have been shown to enhance small bowel
cleansing waves. I prescribe these drugs to be taken at bedtime, be­
cause while the patient is not eating, the body is producing the most
cleansing-wave activity. Typically, patients take these drugs for a
three-month period, following the eradication of bacterial overgrowth.
They then return to see me so that I can discuss with them their
options for going forward.
     Basically, at three months, patients have two options. They can
either stop taking their prescribed medication (erythromycin or Zel-
norm), or they can continue taking it because they find that they are
continuing to feel much better and experiencing few if any symptoms.
My preference is that they eventually stop taking the drugs, because I
am not in favor of the indefinite use of medications. My goal as a
physician is to help my patients return to a state of normal health and
then be free to get on with their lives without the need for medica­
tions. However, if patients choose to stop the preventive therapy, I will
point out that the possibility exists that they may later experience a
recurrence of their bacterial overgrowth. In that case, the solution is
simple: the patient will simply need to begin the protocol again. Those
patients who, for whatever reason, are unable to regain normal cleans­
Help at Last                                                          75


ing-wave activity without the use of medication may then need to stay
on erythromycin or Zelnorm indefinitely.
     In some instances, at three months, patients express their satisfac­
tion with the results of the protocol and choose to continue taking
erythromycin or Zelnorm beyond the three-month period because
they feel well and don't want to risk a return of their IBS symptoms.
These patients return for follow-up every three to six months so that
I can be sure their progress is being maintained and that the drugs are
not causing any side effects.
     Overall, both erythromycin and Zelnorm are very safe at the
dosage levels that we are prescribing. It should be mentioned, how­
ever, that erythromycin may affect the heart's electrical cycle, but evi­
dence suggests this risk is usually associated with much higher doses
(up to 2,000 milligrams per day), not with the 50-milligram dose that
is shown to improve gut movement. Still, because of this potential
side effect, patients who elect to take erythromycin should do so only
under a physician's ongoing supervision, especially if they are already
at risk for developing cardiovascular disease.
     Another cautionary note concerns women in their potential child­
bearing years. During the maintenance phase of the protocol, patients
may decide to become pregnant. I let my female patients know before
we begin the preventive maintenance phase that they are to let me
know if they are considering pregnancy. If they are, then I will have
them stop taking erythromycin or Zelnorm. Although Zelnorm and
erythromycin taken during pregnancy are not associated with risks,
I prefer to be overly cautious. Aside from these factors, I find the
preventive maintenance phase of the protocol using erythromycin or
Zelnorm to be safe even when it is followed indefinitely, so long as it
is undertaken with a physician's supervision.


VI VO N EX
In cases of bacterial overgrowth that remains resistant even after one
or more ten-day antibiotic treatments using rifaximin or neomycin, I
will often recommend that patients follow a two-week diet in which
they drink only water and replace all three of their daily meals with
Vivonex.
    Vivonex is an elemental food formula that contains all of a per­
76                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


son's recommended daily allowances for the vitamins, minerals,
essential fatty acids, and other nutrients that the body requires to
properly function. Vivonex consists of completely predigested pro­
teins, fats, and carbohydrates. Instead of proteins, it contains amino
acids, which are the building blocks of protein. It also contains the
fatty acids that the body needs, as well as carbohydrate in the form of
glucose, a simple sugar that is so readily absorbed by humans that
there is little left for the gut bacteria to feed on.
    Vivonex, which is manufactured by Novartis Nutrition, is manu­
factured in such a way that people can live on it indefinitely if they
had to. Because it is predigested, it is extremely gentle and easy for the
gastrointestinal tract to absorb. All of the ingredients in Vivonex get
absorbed within about the first two feet of the gastrointestinal tract,
often well before reaching the areas where bacterial overgrowth would
usually occur. Research conducted since the 1970s has shown that a
diet consisting exclusively of Vivonex and water can significantly
reduce overall bacterial overload. In tests conducted by my colleagues
and me involving over one hundred IBS patients, bacterial overgrowth
was eradicated in more than 80 percent of all cases after the Vivonex
diet was followed for two weeks, making it one of the most effective
ways for addressing bacterial overgrowth. In fact, we have now treat­
ed more than 800 patients with IBS/bacterial overgrowth this way
with this rate of success.
    During the time that patients are following the Vivonex diet, no
antibiotics are administered. In fact, taking antibiotics during this two-
week period is generally counterproductive. The reason for this is that
antibiotics work only on bacteria that are replicating or reproducing.
    Because of how effective Vivonex is at starving bacteria, the bac­
teria go into a hibernating, nonreplicating mode. Hibernating bacteria,
in general, are not as susceptible to antibiotics.
    Although Vivonex is available over the counter, without the need
for a physician's prescription, I do not recommend that IBS patients
attempt this diet without first informing their doctors. In addition, it
is important that Vivonex be consumed in sufficient quantities each
day so that the patient's caloric needs are met; otherwise, there is the
risk of unwanted weight loss. Moreover, I don't recommend this diet
for patients with diabetes or kidney disease, and especially not for
patients who are receiving dialysis, without their doctors' approval.
Help at Last                                                         77


Beyond those cautions, my colleagues and I have found Vivonex to be
one of the most effective methods for eradicating bacterial over­
growth. (Vivonex is discussed in further detail in Chapter 7.)


D IE T A R Y D O ’S A N D D O N ’T S
The key dietary strategy, especially during the maintenance phase of
the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS, which is focused on eradicating bac­
terial overgrowth, is to avoid eating foods upon which bacteria thrive.
For the most part, this means eliminating hard-to-digest sugars (with
the exception of glucose, which is readily absorbed within the first
two feet of the gastrointestinal tract), as sugar is the most important
nutrient for bacteria, along with a small degree of hydration (water),
in order to thrive and reproduce.
     The diet that I devised and recommend is therefore a low-carbo-
hydrate diet that also limits lactose, a simple sugar found in milk and
other dairy products.
     Many IBS patients, as well as a large portion of the population in
general, are considered to be lactose intolerant, meaning that they
have difficulty digesting lactose. My colleagues and I showed in a
study that the symptoms of lactose intolerance are, in fact, caused by
the bacteria in the small intestine feeding on lactose to cause bloat­
ing and other problems. Lactose must go through the entire fifteen
feet of the small intestine before the body can digest and assimilate
it, making it an ideal simple sugar for bacteria in the distant parts of
the small bowel to feed upon. In most cases, however, once the bac­
teria is eradicated, patients find that they can then consume lactose-
containing foods with far fewer, if any, sym ptom s because the
bacteria are no longer there to interact with the lactose. However,
continuing to eat lactose-containing foods may encourage the bacte­
ria to return. Drinking Lactaid milk (in which the lactose is predi­
gested) is encouraged.
     Sugar substitutes, or artificial sweeteners like Splenda, are also
advised against. Such products are advertised as being low- or zero-
calorie alternatives to sugar. This is because they are sugars that
humans are unable to digest. These sugars are eaten but not absorbed,
so the bacteria of the gut feed on it and can continue to replicate.
Essentially, when it comes to substitutes for sugar like sucralose or
78                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


sorbitol, it's "zero calories for you, 100 percent calories for your gut
bacteria" and is the common reason for bloating associated with chew­
ing sugar-free gum.


Dietary Guidelines for Helping to Eradicate Bacteria
Overgrowth and Prevent Its Return
Traditionally, the diet for people with IBS was one that encourages
the consumption of high-fiber foods along with plenty of fluids to
increase bowel motility and to relieve constipation. In addition,
patients were often advised to eat five to six smaller meals during the
day, instead of the normal, larger three meals that most people com­
monly eat. Unfortunately, both of these measures—high-fiber diets
and more frequent meals— were counterproductive for most patients
with IBS.
    The problem with fiber is that it is comprised of carbohydrate
chains that humans can't digest. The undigested fiber supplements
make their way down to the colon, where the bacteria ferment it, pro­
ducing bloating. Therefore, I recommend a diet that contains only
modest amounts of fiber found naturally in fruits and vegetables, in
place of fiber supplements intended as stool-bulking agents. I think
you're getting the idea: don't eat food that leaves much behind.
    Eating more than three meals a day also causes problems for
people with IBS. The reason for this is that the cleansing-wave mech­
anism that rids the small intestine of food byproducts, waste, and
bacteria can only occur when you're not eating. The more meals that
you have per day— and this includes snacks between meals— the
less time your body has to produce appropriate cleansing waves,
making it easier for the bacteria in the small intestine to maintain
their colonization.
    The dietary approach that I recommend to my IBS patients is to eat
foods that are easily digested, so that most of the nutrients can be
absorbed higher up in the intestine, away from bacteria. In this case,
less "residue" is left over at the distal, or "bottom " end. Your diet
should contain some fiber for bulk and proper stool formation, but
not too much, and it should be primarily composed of foods that are
easily absorbed.
    Foods that are not well absorbed should be minimized or elimi­
Help at Last                                                           79


nated from the diet altogether, because they end up being a good fuel
source for the bacteria residing near the "bottom" of the small intestine.
     Adequate fluid intake throughout the day is also important. If
your diet does not include enough water, it becomes more difficult
for your body to have proper bowel motility. Without healthy bowel
movement, the buildup of bacteria within the gastrointestinal tract
becomes more likely.
     Finally, as I mentioned, it is important that you limit your food
intake to three meals per day, eating nothing in between. This means
that you allow three to five hours between each meal, and avoid
snacks and drinks (other than water) during that time, so that the
small intestine's cleansing-wave function can take place. For those
patients who are most prone to bacterial overgrowth, the cleansing-
wave function may not be very efficient. This is why it is particularly
important that you give the small intestine a break from food for three
to five hours between meals to allow the cleansing function a chance
to rid the intestine of food residue and bacteria.
     What follows are ten guidelines on how to eat in order to most
effectively reduce and prevent bacterial overgrowth. These guidelines
should also be followed after you complete the IBS protocol and have
eradicated bacterial overgrowth, so that you have the best chance of
minimizing its return.

1. Try to avoid the following sweeteners:
   • Corn syrup (fructose)
   • Mannitol
   • Sorbitol
   • Sucralose (Splenda)
   • Lactose
   • Lactulose

    The biggest culprit is sugar-free gum, which most often contains
sorbitol (a sugar that humans cannot digest). On the other hand, glu­
cose, sucrose (table sugar), and aspartame (Equal or Nutrasweet) are
acceptable. You should also limit foods and food products sweetened
with fruit juice, which contains fructose. This is hard because so many
food products are sweetened with fructose. Try to limit your sugar
80                                                     A New IB S Solution


intake to no more than 40 grams per day, and ideally much less. Read­
ing food labels can help you achieve your goal.

2. Limit or eliminate the following "high-residue" foods. These foods
   are difficult to digest and leave residue in the small intestine:
     • Beans (kidney beans, garbanzo beans, pinto beans, etc.)
     • Lentils
     • Peas (including split-pea soup)
     • Soy products (tofu, soymilk)
     • Yogurt, milk, and cheese (100-percent Lactaid milk is acceptable
       as a milk substitute.)

3. Drink eight cups of water a day. A good guideline is to drink two
   cups of water with each of your three meals, then one cup between
   breakfast and lunch, and one cup between lunch and dinner.

4. Beef, fish, poultry, and eggs are acceptable foods, and are also good
   sources of protein. You do not need to limit these foods throughout
   the day. However, be sure to only eat portions that are appropriate
   for your body size. Most people require only about 4-8 ounces of
   meat products per day.

5. Potatoes, pasta, rice, bread, and cereals are also acceptable. It's all
   right to include some of these foods at each meal. They contain car­
   bohydrates that are well absorbed high up in the small intestine,
   serving as fuel for your body, not for the bacteria. A good rule of
   thumb is to eat no more than a half cup to one cup of these carbo­
   hydrate foods at each meal. Believe it or not, white bread is best in
   this circumstance. Try to keep multigrain breads to a minimum. If
   whole-grain breads are desired, oat and wheat fibers are better
   choices. Also avoid wild rice.

6. Fruits should be eaten in moderation—two servings per day. Fruits
   contain fructose, which again is difficult to digest. Choose fresh,
   not dried fruit. Dried fruits concentrate the fructose into a smaller
   package and it allows for more fructose ingestion because more is
   eaten.

7. Fresh, nonstarchy vegetables should also be part of your daily food
   intake. Cooked or lightly steamed vegetables are preferable to raw
Help at Last                                                           81


   vegetables, because they are easier to digest and absorb. Avoid large
   salads full of raw vegetables, as this can lead to too much residue.
   You can incorporate small amounts of salad, but do not eat raw
   vegetables exclusively as they are hard to digest. A good rule of
   thumb is to have three to five cups of cooked vegetables per day.

8. Dairy products are best avoided because of the lactose they con­
   tain. In addition, do not substitute with soymilk, as soy products
   contain nonabsorbable oligosaccharides, a class of carbohydrate
   that can contribute to bloating. Try almond or rice milk instead.
   Another great alternative is Lactaid milk, because all of the lactose
   is predigested.

9. Coffee, tea, and soda should be consumed only in moderate
   amounts. Out of these three types of beverages, tea is probably the
   most healthful choice. Coffee is also acceptable as long as you limit
   your intake to one or two cups per day. Sodas, on the other hand,
   are not a healthy choice. Non-diet sodas may contain corn syrup
   and other types of sugar. Diet sodas are now starting to contain
   sucralose (Splenda), another fuel source for bacteria. These types of
   soda should be avoided altogether. Diet sodas containing Nutra-
   sweet may be consumed in moderation. When you are thirsty, how­
   ever, the best option is to have pure, filtered water. Water flavored
   with lemon or lime juice is also a good alternative.

10. Finally, make sure you eat a balanced diet and that your meals con­
   tain sufficient calories so that you are able to maintain your body
   weight. In addition, incorporate moderate exercise into your week­
   ly routine at least every other day, as regular physical activity helps
   to maintain regular bowel movements.


                 A FIVE-DAY MENU PLAN

The following five-day menu plan can help to reduce symptoms of IBS
that are caused by bacterial overgrowth, because it limits your intake
of the sugars and simple carbohydrates that bacteria consume. After
the five days are over, you can repeat the diet, starting over with the
food plan for Day One, or you can improvise, following the dietary
guidelines described earlier.
                                                  A N ew IB S Solation



                      D ay O ne

                       Breakfast
                 S cra m b le d eggs
           1 piece w h ite-b re a d to a st
                 w ith m argarin e
              C o ffe e o r herbal tea
                1 -2 c u p s o f w ater


                        Mid-Day
                  1 cu p o f w ater


                           Lunch
              T u n a -fish san d w ich
        on ligh tly to a ste d w hite bread
            1 cu p o f vegetable so up
              C o ffe e o r herbal tea
                1 -2 c u p s o f w ater


                 Mid-Afternoon
                  1 cu p o f w ater


                          Dinner
                  B aked chicken
1 baked p o ta to w ith chives a n d /o r m argarine
        1 serving o f steam ed a sp a ra g u s
                 2 c u p s o f w ater
         C lu ste r o f g ra p e s fo r dessert


                      M id-Even ing
                  1    c u p   o f w a t e r
            D ay T wo

              Breakfast
  1 bowl o f puffed-rice cereal
       with Lactaid milk
     Coffee or herbal tea
       1-2 cups o f water


               Mid-Day
        1 cup o f water


                 Lunch
        Broiled chicken
            Small salad
     Coffee or herbal tea
       1 -2 cups o f water


        Mid-Afternoon
        1 cup o f water


                Dinner
                 Steak
   Rice topped with medley
    o f steamed vegetables
(carrots, zucchini, and squash)
        2 cups o f water


            M id-Even ing
        1    c u p   o f w a t e r
                                          A N ew IB S Sola tio n



            D ay T h r ee

                  Breakfast
    M u sh ro o m omelette (no cheese)
1 piece white-bread toast with margarine
          Coffee or herbal tea
           1 -2 cups o f water


                   Mid-Day
             1 cup o f water


                     Lunch
     Turkey burger on sesame-seed
            white-bread bun
         1 cup o f tom ato soup
          Coffee or herbal tea
           1 -2 cups o f water


             Mid-Afternoon
             1 cup o f water


                     Dinner
              Baked halibut
    Roasted portabello m ushroom s
                 Small salad
             2 cups o f water


                 M id-Even ing
             1    c u p   o f w a t e r
H e lp a t La st                                              85


                                   Day Four

                                      Breakfast
                           1 cup o f cream o f wheat
                     (with Lactaid, almond, o r rice milk)
                             Coffee or herbal tea
                               2 cups o f water


                                      Mid-Day
                                   1 cup o f water


                                        Lunch
                            T om ato basil linguini
                           1 small white-bread roll
                                   Roasted beets
                         Diet soda (with aspartam e)
                             Coffee or herbal tea
                              1 -2 cups o f water


                               Mid-Afternoon
                                1 cup o f water


                                       Dinner
                            Rosem ary leg o f lamb
                             Sautéed vegetables
                   Small serving o f garlic mashed potatoes
                               2 cups o f water


                                   M id-Even ing
                               1    c u p   o f w a t e r
                                       A N ew IB S Solu tio n



             D a y F ive

               Breakfast
           Sausage and eggs
1 piece white-bread toast with margarine
          Coffee o r herbal tea
           1 -2 cups o f water


               Mid-Day
             1 cup o f water


                 Lunch
         So u p and small salad
          Coffee or herbal tea
           1 -2 cups o f water


            Mid-Afternoon
             1 cup o f water


                Dinner
      Broiled salm on with lemon
            Cooked carrots
    1 cup o f rice or 1 baked potato
            2 cups o f water


             Mid-Evening
            1 cup o f water
H e lp a t La st                                                          87


C A SE H IST O R Y
My colleagues and I have successfully helped innumerable IBS
patients take control of their symptoms to regain a good quality of
life, including many patients whose symptoms were extremely severe
and seemingly intractable. One such patient was Marjorie Pendergraft,
who suffered with severe and debilitating symptoms of IBS for many
years before she came to me. Her successful experience with the
Cedars-Sinai protocol, which she recounts below, illustrates how effec­
tive it is for treating IBS.

    I don't think I ever had normal bowel habits until I met Dr.
    Pimentel. I had always had some difficulty with my bowels. I
    had had all sorts of tests, but they couldn't find anything wrong.
    Then I began to get a lot worse. My symptoms became acute,
    and for eleven years I suffered with stomach trouble, indiges­
    tion, and nearly constant diarrhea. My diarrhea got to the point
    where I was afraid to go out of the house until I had made five
    or six trips to the bathroom in the mornings and was cleared
    out. This affected my life a great deal, and along with it came
    this tremendous feeling of malaise that was eventually diag­
    nosed as chronic fatigue syndrome. Now, I don't know what
    chronic fatigue syndrome is, and I don't know that anybody
    does. But I had lots of strange symptoms and aches and just a
    general sense of not feeling well.
         Finally, things reached a point to where it was beyond my
    ability to hold a job. I was on disability for about a year. My
    symptoms were acute more often than not, and I just didn't feel
    good. In addition to the diarrhea, I usually experienced bloating
    and a sense of fullness, and I would get a rash and other aller­
    gic reactions to certain foods, especially anything that was
    acidic. At times I was also emotionally despondent. Since I was
    operating on the assumption that my symptoms were due to
    chronic fatigue syndrome, since that was what my doctor had
    told me, I didn't know anything about IBS. When I read that the
    Director of the National Institutes of Health said that chronic
    fatigue is nothing but clinical depression, my response, which
    I've used ever since then with skeptics, is that if you had it, you
    would not call it clinical depression.
                                                    A N ew IB S Sola tio n


     When I went to my doctor, I was given low dosage antide­
pressants because my doctor said that it very often helped the
chronic fatigue. I ended up being prescribed a whole bunch of
different antidepressants. Some had such bad side effects that I
couldn't even get out of bed. I was an absolute $ zombie, and
I immediately stopped taking them. I would try others for a
while, but they just didn't help.
     I continued to undergo tests to rule out anything serious,
and the doctors kept telling me that everything looked just fine.
I was very frustrated by this. My closest friend, who was an
occupational therapist, told me, "Marge, you shouldn't be cross;
the findings are good news. They've ruled out all of the things
that could kill you." I replied that I was cross and disgusted
because I still didn't have any answers about what was making
me feel so terrible.
     The only times I seemed to experience any relief was when­
ever I received a course of antibiotics. I had an impacted tooth,
for instance, and received antibiotics, and after that I felt better
for a while. At that time I had no idea there could be a connec­
tion between the antibiotics and my symptoms. But now I can
see that the antibiotics helped a good deal with the situation I
now know to call "bacterial overgrowth."
     Other than those few times, I continued to suffer, until I
finally learned about Dr. Pimentel's work. One of my friends
suggested I speak with her cousin, whose symptoms sounded
a lot like mine. The woman described everything she had gone
through, and then told me about the work that they were doing
at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. What she told me about bacte­
rial overgrowth was the first description I had ever heard that
I could connect with. So I went to Cedars-Sinai, and I had all of
the tests in the motility unit. That's when I met Dr. Pimentel. I
told him, "This is the first time I have ever heard anything
about my condition that makes perfect sense to me. It feels like
my body's been poisoning itself with these bacteria proliferat­
ing inside of me and sending all these toxins throughout my
system."
     Dr. Pimentel replied that the bacterial overgrowth was what
he and his colleagues believed was causing people like me to
H e lp a t La st                                                          89


    have symptoms. But he also scheduled me for a colonoscopy to
    rule out anything else. I had that, and the results were negative.
    Then I had the breath test, which was very simple and comfort­
    able to do, and it indicated that I had bacterial overgrowth, just
    as we suspected. Dr. Pimentel gave me a prescription for neo­
    mycin and I began to take it each day.
         For the first five days, I thought it wasn't working. In fact,
    my symptoms were getting worse. Then, on the sixth day, when
    I woke up in the morning, for the first time I felt comfortable
    inside my skin. Even the bed felt softer and more comfortable
    than it had for a long, long time. I told my husband, "I feel good!
    I feel better than I have felt in years!"
         When I returned for my follow-up with Dr. Pimentel, I
    explained that I didn't think the neomycin was working at first
    because I'd started feeling worse, not better. He told me that he
    thought the reason for my initial discomfort was because all of
    the bacteria were "giving up the ghost and releasing more tox­
    ins," but once that passed I got better. "Oh, boy," I replied. "Did
    I ever!" It was a dramatic improvement. It was like somebody
    had flipped a switch.
         That was seven years ago. Since then, my entire life has been
    renewed. I can do practically anything now, and it's just mirac­
    ulous. Right after I finished my treatment, I told Dr. Pimentel
    that I felt twenty years younger, and I still do. Since that time,
    my husband and I moved up to Seattle from Los Angeles, and
    recently we have been remodeling our home, tearing down
    walls, painting all of the rooms, and I'm just having a ball. I
    couldn't have done that before!
        Not only are my IBS symptoms much, much better, but I
    also have tremendous amounts of energy and I can go for very
    long periods of time without experiencing problems. If my symp­
    toms flare up again, as they do on occasion, I go back to Dr.
    Pimentel for another round of antibiotics. Now he prescribes
    neomycin in combination with rifaximin, and that works even
    better. I'm so grateful that he and his colleagues have been
    doing this research. Since I've found out about him, I've had
    people call me with their own IBS symptoms and I've referred
    them all to Dr. Pimentel because his approach really works!
90                                                                                     A N ew IB S Solu tio n


C O N C LU SIO N
Now that you've read this far, you know not only what causes most
cases of IBS, but also how to treat it most effectively. As Marjorie's
story shows, the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS is often the only thing
that has enabled patients to regain control of their lives and become
free of their symptoms. It is highly effective for the vast majority of
IBS patients who consult with my colleagues and me. Some patients,
however, are interested in combining the protocol with other alterna­
tive healing approaches. In the next chapter, I provide information
about which of those therapies have value as an adjunctive aid to the
Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS, and which of them are of little value.


          Summary            of the         C e d a r s - S i n a i P r o t o c o l f o r IB S


                                            I          «               I
         Diarrhea type
                                I I             Constipation Type

                                                        -1
                                                         ----------
                                            -----------------
                                                                    II                  Alternator Type

                                                                                              _L
     Lactulose Breath Test
                                I I            Lactulose Breath Test
                                                                    I I              Laotulose Breath Test


                                                    Antibiotic


                 1. Rifaximin, or
                 2. Neomycin, or
                 3. Vivonex (last resort)


                                             Lactulose Breath Test
                                          (Confirm treatment success)



                  No Success                                 Success
           (Breath test still abnormal)                (Breath test Normal)


                                      Feel Better                                Not Better

                                     I Z CT
                             Prevent Bacterial Overgrowth                  Look for another reason
                              (Stimulate Cleaning Wave)                         for symptoms


                             1, Diet changes plus,
                             2, Tegaserod at bedtime, or
                             3, Erythromycin at bedtime
                           CHAPTER            7



  The Best of Both Worlds:
    Enhancing Your Results
   With Alternative Therapies


       y now you understand our strategy for treating IBS based on

B      the presence of bacterial overgrowth as discussed in Chapter 6.
       However, there are a number of "alternative" therapies that
some people with IBS find useful for helping to manage their symp­
toms. This chapter is devoted to examining the most common of these
alternatives and providing you with a better understanding of why
they may or may not be useful. I will also try to place their benefits in
the context of the bacterial theory where appropriate. Bear in mind
that some of these alternatives do not reduce bacterial overgrowth to
any significant degree. For some people, however, these techniques
can help to alleviate symptoms associated with IBS.


P R O B IO T IC S
As I discussed in Chapter 4, probiotics are commonly referred to as
"good" bacteria and probiotic supplements are often used as a means
of increasing the supply of "good" bacteria in the gastrointestinal
tract, while holding "bad" bacteria in check. Actually, when it comes
to the gastrointestinal tract, the concept of "good" bacteria is a mis­
nomer. As I mentioned in Chapter 4, very few, if any, of the approxi­
mately 400 different strains of bacteria in the gastrointestinal are in fact
"bad" or "good." Rather, they simply represent the various strains of
bacteria that are normally found in the colon (or large intestine). It is

                                    91
92                                                      A N ew IB S Solution


when these strains of bacteria leave the areas of the gastrointestinal
tract in which they properly belong that problems can occur.
     Our understanding of the role bacteria play in the gastrointesti­
nal tract, as well as the degree to which their various populations are
within normal limits, is at present incomplete. In fact, we are only
able to culture 20 percent of the gut bacteria because we do not
understand how to grow the remaining 80 percent. This keeps us
from finding out which bacteria or combinations may be helpful or
harmful. For this reason, researchers are now conducting genetic
studies on all of the microorganisms that occur in the gastrointesti­
nal tract in an attempt to determine the cellular "fingerprint" of the
various strains of bacteria as a means of figuring out which strains
are most likely to predominate in the normal gut. This type of
research could go a long way toward helping us understand how all
of the strains of bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract contribute to
both health and disease.
     At present, people with IBS are all too often advised to have a stool
sample cultured to see whether or not they have adequate amounts
of certain "good" bacteria, such as lactobacillus (especially the strains
L. acidophilus and L. bulgaricus) or bifidobacteria. If the levels of these
types of bacteria are found to be low, it is often recommended that
they be replenished via supplementation so that the IBS patient will
feel better. This approach is based on data suggesting that IBS subjects
have lower lactobacillus numbers in their stool especially if they have
diarrhea-predominant IBS. We now know that probiotic supplemen­
tation overall has shown little long-term benefit for IBS patients.
    A number of controlled studies showed limited benefits. In one
study, IBS patients were given a probiotic product called VSL #3. Com­
pared with patients in the control group, the patients who took the
product showed modest improvement in bloating. In another study,
IBS patients were given isolated strains of bifidobacteria (£>. infantis) or
an isolated strain of lactobacillus (L. salivarius). The benefits produced
by the lactobacillus were statistically nonexistent, while the patients
given bifidobacteria showed some reduction of their IBS symptoms as
long as they continued taking the supplement.
    In still another double-blind study, involving fifty patients with
IBS, test subjects received L. plantarum LPO 1 (another lactobacillus
strain) and B. breve BRO (a type of bifidobacteria) or placebo powder
The Best o f Both Worlds                                               93


for a period of twenty-eight days. After twenty-eight days, 49 percent
of the probiotic group showed improvements in their abdominal pain,
compared with 29 percent of the placebo group.
     While a reduction in IBS symptoms is certainly a good outcome, it
is not the same as the elimination of IBS itself. According to current
scientific study, probiotics have not been found to eliminate IBS.
     Another problem with probiotic supplementation is that the
cleansing waves in the small intestines of IBS patients are inadequate.
It's possible that a person with diminished cleansing-wave capacity
who takes probiotic supplements could find his or her situation even
worse as the probiotics accumulate in the small intestine, where they
don't belong.
     On the other hand, an animal study conducted by European
researchers has shown that certain bifidobacteria and lactobacillus
may stimulate the cleansing-wave mechanism. In the study, animals
were purposely bred so that they lacked any bacteria (germ free).
When they were given either bifidobacteria or lactobacillus, a stimu­
lation of cleansing-wave activity was observed. However, the conclu­
sions from this study may not apply to us because our bodies contain
a multitude of bacterial strains.
     In concluding this discussion of probiotics, I want to point out that
certain strains of "good" bacteria may provide some relief of the sever­
ity of IBS symptoms. At this stage in our understanding of probiotics,
as well as gastrointestinal bacteria in general, it remains too early to
know the best approach for using probiotics. Future studies may show
that they do indeed have a place in the overall treatment for IBS. Thus
far, they only appear to provide symptom relief, and not provide a
comprehensive solution for IBS such as that provided by our protocol.


D IE T
Diet certainly has a place when it comes to treating IBS. Eating health­
ily and wisely, for example, is a good way of preventing food poison­
ing, which is often a "trigger event" for IBS symptoms. It also goes
without saying that we should do our best to eat foods that are free of
chemical additives and preservatives as much as possible, and to avoid
the processed and "junk" fast foods that are unfortunately a major part
of the American diet. As we discussed earlier, people withlBS should
94                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


also reduce the intake of foods and drinks that contain sugars and other
simple carbohydrates, the prime nutrients for bacteria.
    To see for yourself how powerfully sugar attracts and nourishes
bacteria, try this simple experiment. Pour equal amounts of water into
two clear glasses. Add some sugar to one of the glasses, and then set
both glasses on a countertop overnight. Next morning, the glass with­
out sugar will still be clear, while the glass with sugar will be cloudy
due to bacteria that found their way into the water to feed on the
sugar. The longer the glass with sugar is set out, the cloudier it will
become as the bacteria grow and multiply.
    A similar process occurs in the body when sugars and other sim­
ple carbohydrates are regularly made available for bacteria. People
with IBS who regularly eat foods containing sugars and other simple
carbohydrates (such as refined flour, another common staple ingredi­
ent in fast and processed foods) are actually making their IBS symp­
toms worse.
    The key here is not that all sugars are bad, but that the less
digestible sugars are available in larger amounts for fermentation by
small bowel bacteria. Most of the sugars found in so many of today's
processed foods are not easy for the body to digest. As a result, these
sugars are able to travel through much of the full length of the small
bowel, reaching areas where bacteria can feast upon them. Lactose, a
milk sugar, falls into this category. The lactose in one glass of milk
requires nearly the entire length of the gastrointestinal tract in order
to be absorbed by the body because there is not enough lactase, the
enzyme that breaks down lactose, in the small intestine. In addition,
lactose intolerance increases with age, making it increasingly difficult
for adults to properly digest. So, even something as seemingly innoc­
uous as a glass of milk can worsen bacterial overgrowth.
    By the time they see a doctor, most IBS patients have already
discovered that milk or other dairy products make their symptoms
worse and have already omitted them from their diets. Although
avoiding milk products does not eliminate IBS symptoms, patients
complain that the milk products aggravate their symptoms. Other
non-digestible sugars that I advise my IBS patients to avoid or reduce
include fructose (corn syrup), which is nearly ubiquitous in today's
commercial food products; maltose; maltitol; sucralose (Splenda); sor­
bitol; and lactulose. Sugar substitutes such as sorbitol and sucralose
The B est o f Both Worlds                                                        95


are two of the worst. Both are non-digestible carbohydrates that are
known to cause or exacerbate bloating and gas, and may alter bowel
function.
    Because sugars and other carbohydrates can exacerbate IBS symp­
toms, many IBS patients are turning to low-carbohydrate diets such as
the South Beach Diet and, especially, the Atkins Diet. I've been told by
many of my IBS patients, and have confirmed this in my clinic, that
after they adopt such diets, they begin to notice a decrease in their
severity of their symptoms. They feel less bloated, have less gas, and
less pain in their stomachs. But as soon as they resume eating carbo­
hydrates, their symptoms soon become as bad as or worse than before.
    I caution my patients about staying on the Atkins Diet for long
periods of time, because it overemphasizes protein-rich foods, and I
doubt that even Dr. Atkins expected that people would follow the
extreme early stage of his diet indefinitely. In the short term, the
Atkins and similar diets can help alleviate IBS symptoms. As a health­
ier alternative, I recommend that IBS patients make it a habit to elim­
inate or at least severely restrict their intake of the non-digestible
forms of sugars and other simple carbohydrates mentioned above,
focusing instead on (ideally organic) fresh and non-starchy vegetables,
fish, poultry, and in moderation red meat, while also avoiding sodas
and fruit juices (especially commercial brands), all of which are high
in sugar content. This deprives the bacteria of their primary food
sources, so they cannot grow and multiply.




                  Glucose: The Healthy Sugar
   While other forms of sugar can hurt your health, there is one form of sugar
   that is not only good for you, but is also essential for the proper function
   of your body. That sugar is glucose.
      Glucose is the most important carbohydrate for your body’s metabo­
   lism. All of the cells and tissues, especially of the brain and nervous system,
   use glucose to produce energy. In addition, unlike other sugars, glucose
   does not contribute to the proliferation of bacteria in the gastrointestinal
   tract because it gets absorbed in the body too quickly, never reaching the
   small intestine, where bacteria overgrowth typically occurs.
96                                                     A New IB S Solution


The Elemental Diet
 For IBS patients with severe bacterial overgrowth, adopting what I
 call an "elemental diet" for a few weeks can often significantly im­
 prove IBS symptoms, as well as eradicate bacterial overgrowth. The
 diet involves abstaining from all solid food for two weeks, and instead
 consuming the product Vivonex and drinking only water.
     Vivonex is available over the counter at most local drugstores. This
dietary approach is an "elemental diet" because Vivonex consists of
the elemental building blocks for each of the major food categories—
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats.
     Instead of proteins, it contains amino acids; instead of complex
fats, it contains fatty acids; and instead of carbohydrate chains, it con­
tains glucose. As long as enough Vivonex is consumed to ensure prop­
er caloric intake, it provides everything that the human body needs.
Moreover, because the constituents of each food group are already
broken down, the product is extremely easy for the body to absorb.
     My colleagues and I published a study in Digestive Diseases and
Sciences in 2003, in which we placed approximately one hundred IBS
patients on Vivonex for two weeks. Within that period, more than 80
percent of them had their bacterial overgrowth completely eradicated,
making the elemental diet one of the most effective approaches for
dealing with IBS.
     The challenge is getting patients to stay on the diet, since it is
only natural that they might begin to crave some other type of food
during the two-week period. In addition, some people balk at the
cost of Vivonex— a two-week supply retails for approximately $450.
And because Vivonex is an over-the-counter nutritional supplement,
most insurance companies won't cover the expense. But as I tell my
patients, the cost of Vivonex is insignificant compared with the bene­
fits they will achieve if they follow the diet for two weeks as recom­
mended— not to mention the money they will save on other treatments
that do little to nothing to relieve their symptoms of IBS. By far, the
elemental diet is the most effective self-care approach for IBS because
it nourishes the body while at the same time it provides no nourish­
ment for the bacteria that cause IBS. For best results, however, I rec­
ommend that the elemental diet be conducted under the supervision
of a physician.
The Best o f Both Worlds                                                97


PEPPER M IN T C A PSU LES
To help relieve the cramping so often associated with IBS, enteric-coat­
ed peppermint capsules can sometimes be helpful. Peppermint has
been shown to be a calcium channel blocker of muscle. Calcium chan­
nel blockers get their name because of their ability to block calcium
fluctuations in the muscle cells, thereby causing muscles to relax.
     Enteric-coated peppermint capsules have been shown in a scien­
tific meta-analysis (an analysis of numerous studies) to provide some
degree of benefit for IBS. In many cases, the benefits were modest, yet
nonetheless real and statistically significant, in terms of reducing
cramping within the gastrointestinal tract. Based on its ability to act as
a calcium channel blocker, researchers presume these benefits are due
to the peppermint's ability to relax the muscles of the stomach, small
intestine, and colon. As a result, these muscles are less likely to con­
tract against gases, and therefore the sensations of high pressure in the
abdomen will usually be less painful. In addition, there have been case
reports that indicate peppermint may also have some degree of effec­
tiveness as an antibacterial agent, so the possibility exists that enteric-
coated peppermint might also help arrest bacterial overgrowth.
     To achieve the above benefits, the peppermint needs to be enteric-
coated to protect it from being broken down and digested prior to
reaching those areas of the gastrointestinal tract. Other forms of pep­
permint, such as peppermint tea, may not give the same benefits
because they are broken down by the time they reach the esophagus
and stomach. Enteric-coated peppermint should be available at your
local health food store.


P A N C R EA T IC EN ZYM ES
In some cases of IBS, the antibiotics mentioned in Chapter 6 that are
a core feature of the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS may not work.
Usually the reason is that the bacteria have developed a resistance to
these drugs. In this case, my colleagues and I may have such patients
supplement with pancreatic enzymes. Pancreatic enzymes taken
with meals can help to digest and break down foods before they pass
too far through the gastrointestinal tract, thus starving the bacteria.
Typically, patients taking pancreatic enzyme supplements report a
98                                                    A New IB S Solution


30 to 40 percent improvement in their symptoms over time. This
approach is unlikely to eradicate bacterial overgrowth but can re­
duce it.


ACUPUN CTURE
Acupuncture can be very useful for helping IBS patients cope with
many of their symptoms. Both the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and the World Health Organization (WHO), for example, have cited
acupuncture as an appropriate treatment for treating symptoms such
as abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, and muscle cramping.
    Acupuncture has also been shown to reduce stress and stress-
related problems, such as anxiety, menstrual cramps, and premen­
strual syndrome, which can exacerbate the pain and frequency of IBS
symptoms.
    Acupuncture involves the use of needles inserted in specific points
along the body, which run along pathways known as meridians.
According to acupuncture theory, the meridians are the pathways
through which run a subtle form of vital energy known as qi (pro­
nounced "chee"). The purpose of acupuncture is to regulate the flow
of qi so that it remains balanced, stable, and unblocked, instead of
stagnant, excessive, or deficient. The end result, acupuncturists claim,
is improved regulation of all of the body's physical processes, in­
creased energy, and improved mental and emotional states. Depend­
ing on the needs of the patient, acupuncture treatments can be as short
as fifteen minutes and as long as an hour or more, with sessions typi­
cally lasting for thirty minutes, with the acupuncture needles remain­
ing in place for most of that time.
    Although modern science has now validated acupuncture's abili­
ty to provide significant pain relief and to help reduce symptoms of
other disease conditions, the scientific explanation remains unknown.
Western scientists and physicians who have studied acupuncture the­
orize that it works by affecting the nervous system, stimulating the
release of endorphins, chemicals produced by the body to block pain
signals in the brain and spinal cord, and to heighten feelings of well­
being and pleasure. Research has also shown that acupuncture pro­
duces positive changes in the conduction of electrical signals in the
brain, and increases blood flow to the thalamus, a part of the brain that
The Best o f Both Worlds                                            99


helps regulate and control the relaying of sensory impulses, including
pain. Acupuncture has also been shown to regulate the release of neu­
rotransmitters such as norepinephrine and serotonin.
     In 2000, researchers presented evidence that acupuncture im­
proved quality-of-life scores and gastrointestinal symptoms among
IBS patients, compared with relaxation therapy. In a randomized con­
trolled study involving twenty-seven IBS patients, participants re­
ceived either acupuncture or relaxation treatments three times a week
for two weeks. Both groups reported statistically significant improve­
ments in their abdominal pain at the end of the two weeks, as well as
overall improvements in their quality of life. However, after an addi­
tional four weeks of follow-up observations, the improvements only
persisted among the patients who had received acupuncture. In addi­
tion, a statistically significant reduction in stress perception was
reported by the acupuncture group, but not by the control group,
throughout the study. Based on these results, the researchers who con­
ducted the study concluded that acupuncture is an effective form of
treatment for the pain and stress symptoms of IBS, and that its bene­
fits are superior to standard relaxation treatments.
     I do not prescribe acupuncture, but based on the scientific evi­
dence I agree that acupuncture may improve IBS symptoms in some
cases. If you should choose to receive acupuncture treatments for your
IBS, here are some guidelines that you should follow:

• Be sure that the practitioner you choose is properly licensed and
  credentialed to practice in your state of residence. (Some states
  allow acupuncturists to work under their own license. Others re­
  quire that acupuncturists work under the supervision of a licensed
  physician [MD or DO].)

• Make sure that the practitioner uses only single-use, sterile, dis­
  posable needles to prevent the rare but real possibility of infection
  or the transmission of diseases such as hepatitis.

• Avoid acupuncture if you suffer from an uncontrolled bleeding dis­
  order or are taking anticoagulant medications, such as coumadin,
  because acupuncture needles have the potential, although rare, to
  draw blood.

• Be sure to tell your acupuncturist if you are pregnant, as the stim­
100                                                  A N ew IB S Solution


  ulation of acupuncture points, especially on the stomach, can trig­
  ger contractions of the uterus, possibly provoking premature labor
  or miscarriage.

• Inform your acupuncturist if you have diabetes, and especially if you
  have diabetic neuropathy. In such cases, acupuncture treatments
  on the arms and legs should be conducted with extreme caution.


LESS -E FFE C T IV E TR EA TM E N T S
To conclude this chapter, I wish to briefly mention a few of the more
popular health choices people often make to treat IBS that have little
to no actual value. These include antiflatulent drugs, antidiarrhea
medications, antispasmodic medications, and colonics and enemas.


Antiflatulent Drugs
A number of popular drugs are marketed to reduce gas. Since gas is
often associated with IBS, IBS patients may be tempted to try these
agents. Such products basically break bubbles, but do not get rid of the
gas, so any relief they do provide will be fleeting.


Antidiarrhea Medications
These drugs, including the popular product Imodium, can stop diar­
rhea symptoms at least temporarily, but they do nothing to address the
root problem of IBS. Using antidiarrhea medications to relieve diar­
rhea associated with IBS is akin to using morphine to relieve the pain
caused by IBS; neither of these approaches works to resolve IBS. As
a result, I cannot recommend such medications, except perhaps in
extreme situations where diarrhea would otherwise be too uncom­
fortable and/or embarrassing.


Antispasmodic Medications
This class of drugs can be considered attractive to IBS patients who
suffer pain from muscle spasms and cramping. However, like the
drugs mentioned above, the relief they offer is little more than a
The Best o f Both Worlds                                                       101




                Beware of False Hopes:
           Drugs That Have Little Effect on IBS
  In recent years, a variety of drugs have become popular for treating the
  symptoms of IBS. In most cases, these agents have little or no proven ben­
  efit in IBS. One class of such drugs includes the antispasmodics, such as
  Donnatal and Bentyl. Such drugs are used to relieve the pain and cramp­
  ing associated with IBS. However, they provide little or no benefit for IBS.
      Fiber products are also sometimes prescribed for IBS patients with
  symptoms of chronic constipation. While getting enough fiber in your diet
  is certainly an important step to health, a recent meta-analysis of all clin­
  ical studies conducted on IBS found that fiber had no major benefit for
  treating the constipation associated with IBS, and some fiber formulations
  can even contribute to increased gas and bloating.
      IBS patients are also sometimes advised to try products to control flat­
  ulence, such as Gas-X. Such products are advertised as being able to reduce
  gas and hence distension. But all that these products really do is break the
  gas bubbles. So, instead of the gas being eliminated, the bubbles break and
  the gas collects in larger pockets. In other words, the quantity of gas itself
  remains the same.



"Band-Aid" approach for treating IBS, as they are incapable of resolv­
ing the underlying cause.


Colonic Therapy and Enemas
Many IBS patients opt to receive colonic therapy or give themselves
enemas in an effort to cleanse their lower bowel. Colonic therapy is
administered by a trained colon therapist and involves the application
of filtered water into the entire length of the colon via a speculum
inserted into the rectum. Properly administered, colon therapy can
help dislodge fecal matter from the colon, along with fecal microor­
ganisms, including bacteria. Enemas, by contrast, are only able to
cleanse the lower, sigmoid colon.
    While they can purge the colon of almost all fecal material, thus
102                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


dramatically reducing the bacterial load in the gut, colonics do not cure
IBS and, moreover, are usually not enough to resolve the underlying
bacterial overgrowth. There are two reasons for this. First, colonics are
incapable of reaching the small intestine, where the offending bacteria
live. Secondly, even though colonic therapy can significantly reduce
bacteria in the colon, bacteria repopulate very quickly. Some strains are
capable of doubling in volume every twenty to thirty minutes, and
overall, bacteria can repopulate within one or two days, causing symp­
toms to return to the same level of severity as before the colonic. Often,
patients wind up having repeated colonic sessions without making any
true long-term progress in terms of addressing the cause of their IBS
symptoms. Enemas are even less effective in this regard.
    In addition, colonics are not without risk. I know of cases where
patients had to be admitted to the hospital because of rectal bleeding
caused by the speculum, either because the patients' rectums were
punctured or because they sustained a tear on the rectal surface. If the
therapist fails to sterilize the equipment before and after each session,
there is also the possibility that patients could contract infectious dis­
eases, including AIDS and hepatitis B or C. For all of these reasons, I
do not recommend colonics or enemas.


C O N C LU SIO N
The therapies outlined in this chapter, in many cases, result in a de­
crease of IBS symptoms, and, in the case of the elemental diet (Vivo­
nex), might even help to resolve bacterial overgrowth altogether.
Overall, with the exception of the elemental diet, most of these treat­
ments cannot do more than mask the symptoms. To most effectively
address and resolve the bacterial overgrowth that causes IBS, the full
Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS is required.
    Now that you understand which alternative therapeutic methods
have some degree of value, and which do not, let's examine the rela­
tionship between IBS and other conditions, such as fibromyalgia. The
link between such diseases is the subject of Chapter 8.
                          CHAPTER 8



     Fibromyalgia and Other
     Associated Conditions:
              The IBS Connection


           any people with IBS also suffer from other health problems,

M          such as fibromyalgia. The reverse is also true. Many people
           with fibromyalgia suffer from IBS. The link between these
two conditions is well established but poorly understood. This chap­
ter sheds light on how IBS and fibromyalgia are connected, and also
examines how IBS may play a role in other associated conditions, such
as interstitial cystitis and various gynecological problems, as well as
fatigue and a lack of mental clarity or "brain fog."


FIBRO M YA LG IA
Fibromyalgia is a condition characterized by many symptoms. Its pri­
mary characteristic is widespread muscle pain caused by the tighten­
ing and thickening of the myofascia, the tissues that hold muscles
together.
     Fibromyalgia is a very complex diagnosis, with no known cause.
Compounding the problem is the disparity of opinions within the
medical community. If a patient is experiencing muscle aches and
pains, the diagnosis they receive can depend upon the doctor's spe­
cialty. An internist may tell the patient there is nothing wrong, after
medical testing fails to find indications of rheumatological conditions
such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. Thus, people with fibromyalgia
are in a similar situation to IBS patients who are told that their symp­

                                  103
104                                                   A N ew IB S Solution


toms are "all in their head." In both IBS and fibromyalgia, the patients
know that the symptoms they are experiencing are real, but they are
given no medical validation, leaving them frustrated and at a loss as
to what they can do to help themselves.
     On the other hand, if that same patient were to see a rheumatol­
ogist, who is oriented to look for fibromyalgia, the symptoms would
be tested according to the diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia. Within
this criteria are eighteen so-called tender points in the muscle areas on
the body. If eleven or more of these points are tender or painful when
the physician presses on them, and if the tenderness continues for at
least three months, the patient is said to have fibromyalgia. However,
because the cause of fibromyalgia is not known, treating it remains
difficult, especially so because of the variance of views about fibro­
myalgia within the medical community. Some physicians consider it
to be due to an overactive immune system, while other physicians
maintain it doesn't actually exist. The views run from one extreme to
the other.
     Overall, just as IBS is a "hot potato" condition in the minds of
many gastroenterologists because of how difficult it can be to diagnose
and treat, fibromyalgia is a similar "hot potato" for many rheumatol­
ogists. Currently, there is no standard treatment for fibromyalgia. The
scope of treatments employed by physicians is enormous, ranging
from a component of cough syrup to fluconazole (a treatment for sys­
temic yeast infection [candidiasis]), to treatments for Lyme disease.
Consequently, most fibromyalgia patients find themselves in a very
difficult situation, and yet are determined to find a treatment that can
actually help them.
     There is a tremendous overlap between IBS and fibromyalgia. Not
all IBS patients present with fibromyalgia symptoms, but nearly all
fibromyalgia patients have IBS. As a result, there has been a growing
amount of interest among researchers to examine whether or not
fibromyalgia is linked to IBS. A lot of very good work in this area has
been conducted by Dr. Lin Chang at the University of California, at
Los Angeles (UCLA).
     Given the possible link between IBS and fibromyalgia, my col­
leagues and I decided to explore whether bacterial overgrowth might
be a factor in fibromyalgia, as fibromyalgia appears to have a role in
IBS.
Fibromyalgia and O th er Associated Conditions                         7 05


     In our first study, breath tests were administered to fibromyalgia
patients. A higher percentage of them tested positive for elevated lev­
els of bacterial overgrowth compared with control groups. Moreover,
subjects with fibromyalgia were noted to suffer from many of the gas­
trointestinal complaints that are typical of IBS.
     But the exciting findings did not occur until we conducted our
second study. In that study, which we published in the Annals o f
Rheumatology, we found that fibromyalgia patients had bacterial over­
growth more often than IBS sufferers. Furthermore, fibromyalgia
patients had hydrogen levels during breath testing that were the high­
est we had ever seen; levels significantly higher than non-fibromyal­
gia IBS patients and, of course, healthy control patients. My colleagues
and I were struck by these findings because they show that there is a
link between bacterial overgrowth and fibromyalgia.
     Let's examine how bacterial overgrowth, especially overgrowth of
bacteria that produce elevated hydrogen levels, might contribute to
fibromyalgia pain.
     The initial assumption is that greater hydrogen levels imply that
there are more bacteria in the small intestine, which would lead to a
greater production of bacterial toxins (endotoxins). These endotoxins
enter the bloodstream through the small intestine. We know, from
many studies in the scientific literature, that these endotoxins in the
bloodstream can enter and affect the liver; there, they are detoxified.
However, endotoxin levels can exceed the liver's detoxifying capacity,
leading to toxemia, a condition in which toxic substances are spread
throughout the body through the bloodstream. This means that bacte­
rial overgrowth beyond a certain threshold produces a corresponding
degree of toxemia. We also know that if the degree of toxemia reaches
a certain threshold, it can cause pain. Endotoxins, in particular, are well
known to cause pain. In studies of rats, for example, it has been shown
that when an endotoxin is injected into the skin of rats, they will devel­
op pain not only in the area of the body that is injected, but will also
experience pain over their entire bodies. This is the model of pain that
can be extrapolated from the research my colleagues and I have con­
ducted that links bacterial overgrowth to fibromyalgia. We believe that
the levels of endotoxins in fibromyalgia patients might just exceed the
liver's detoxifying capacity and spill over into the bloodstream to cause
systemic hyperalgesia, a condition characterized by a heightened sen­
106                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


sitivity to pain that closely matches the characteristics of fibromyalgia.
Therefore, conducting further research to see if reducing bacterial
overgrowth in fibromyalgia patients will also reduce their pain symp­
toms makes good sense. This is to some degree supported by the fact
that our research found a correlation between body pain severity and
the level of hydrogen on breath tests.
     Though we have not yet conducted a large-scale definitive double­
blind study to determine whether the Cedars-Sinai protocol for treat­
ing IBS will achieve similar results for fibromyalgia patients, early
indications are that it might. In a small, randomized double-blind
study that my colleagues and I presented at the American College of
Rheumatology meeting in Boston in 1999, we showed that fibromyal­
gia patients who received the antibiotic drug neomycin, and whose
breath tests became normal as a result, also experienced relief from
their fibromyalgia symptoms, as evidenced by a significant improve­
ment in their tender point count.
     An example of this is the case of a sixty-two-year-old woman who
had been given a diagnosis of fibromyalgia ten years before first being
seen at the Cedars-Sinai GI Motility Program. She recognized the con­
tribution of her bowel symptoms to her overall condition and after
reading our work sought consultation with us. Her breath test showed
extremely high hydrogen levels; at the same time, she had fourteen
out of eigthteen tender points positive on her physical exam. She then
received a course of the antibiotic neomycin. By the time the treatment
was completed, her bowel symptoms had resolved, as had her body
pain. Using our strategy of prevention, she has remained relatively
symptom-free for the last three years.
     Based on the results of patients, such as the one mentioned above,
who experienced a recovery from their IBS symptoms as well as sig­
nificant improvements in their fibromyalgia, I am comfortable saying
that bacteria overgrowth is a factor physicians ought to consider in
cases such as this.


IN T E R S T IT IA L C Y S T IT IS
Interstitial cystitis, also known as irritable bladder, is a disease char­
acterized by inflammation and irritation of the bladder. Symptoms of
Fibromyalgia and O th er Associated Conditions                        107


interstitial cystitis include frequent urination and dysuria (painful or
difficult urination).
     Like fibromyalgia, interstitial cystitis has no known cause and is
another "hot potato" disease, meaning that many urologists and
nephrologists (physicians who specialize in the treatment of kidney
disease) are often unable to treat it with consistently reliable results.
The use of cytoscopy (in which a cytoscope is placed inside the blad­
der for diagnostic purposes) sometimes reveals a slightly elevated
immune reaction within the bladder lining.
     Many patients with IBS are also diagnosed with interstitial cysti­
tis, so there is a degree of overlap between the two conditions. In
addition, both conditions are less understood, in terms of their patho­
physiology, than fibromyalgia.
     We do not yet know whether there is a direct relationship between
bacterial overgrowth and interstitial cystitis. But there is one interest­
ing area of research that suggests a potential link. European research­
ers have shown that the cleansing waves of the small intestine are
synchronized with the body's need to urinate. In one study that mon­
itored the cleansing waves of the small intestine for twenty-four
hours, the researchers found that 80 to 90 percent of all trips to the
bathroom in order to urinate were preceded by cleansing waves of the
gut. This finding suggested that the physiological mechanisms that
activate the small intestine's cleansing waves may also activate blad­
der function.
     Thus, it is possible that dysfunction of the cleansing-wave mecha­
nisms is in some way linked to bladder dysfunction. If future research
shows a correlation between these types of dysfunction, then intersti­
tial cystitis may also be due to the gut movement disturbances seen in
IBS that cause bacterial overgrowth. If researchers discover that defi­
ciencies within the cleansing-wave mechanisms cause or contribute to
dysfunctions of the bladder, this could explain the overlap between
IBS and interstitial cystitis.


G Y N E C O LO G IC A L PRO BLEM S
One of the difficulties associated with IBS is that it presents in so many
different ways. Abdominal pain is a manifestation of IBS, but pain is
a nondescript symptom of many problems in the abdominal and
108                                                  A N ew IB S Solution


pelvic cavity. Gynecological problems, such as pelvic pain, are a good
example of this. Many women with pelvic pain syndromes, for exam­
ple, experience relief from their symptoms following a healthy bowel
movement.
    Pelvic pain is a frequent reason for women to seek medical atten­
tion from their gynecologist. With up to one in six women suffering
from IBS, gynecologists also see many women who have IBS as well
as their presenting complaint. Since IBS is very common as are many
gynecologic conditions such as endometriosis, this raises a question:
Is the pain causing women to visit the gynecologist representing a
gynecological problem or might it actually be IBS?
    This is a very important question that deserves serious contem­
plation by patient and gynecologist alike to avoid leading women
with IBS symptoms to believe that they have gynecological problems
instead.
    Mislabeling the patient can result in unwarranted surgical pro­
cedures. It's not uncommon for women with IBS to be referred to a
gynecologist for symptoms that are mistakenly assumed to be gyne­
cological in origin; for example, endometriosis, ovarian cysts, pelvic
inflammatory disease, and various other gynecological conditions
cause pain. As a result, invasive gynecological procedures might be
performed that fail to address the patient's problem because the real
culprit is IBS.
    A diagnosis of endometriosis is the best example of this. It is well
understood that if endometriosis involves the bowel or rectum, it can
result in disturbances of bowel function. In addition, endometriosis
can cause pelvic pain. Yet both of these symptoms— disturbed bowel
function and pelvic pain—can also be caused by IBS. That being the
case, physicians who treat endometriosis-like pain should first ask
themselves if it is endometriosis or IBS that is causing the symptoms.
The answer may determine whether cauterization or laparoscopic
surgery should be performed.
    The issue of unnecessary gynecological surgeries due to an
underappreciation of the contribution of IBS to pelvic symptoms
points to the need for further research in order to understand the
overlap that exists between symptoms that are truly gynecological
and gynecological-like symptoms that are actually due to IBS. In
the meantime, the potential similarities between gynecological and
Fibromyalgia and O th er Associated Conditions                      109


IBS symptoms is something that women and their physicians need
to understand.
     One way to encourage the consideration of IBS is to take a bowel
symptom history. If the pelvic pain is associated with alterations in
bowel function such as diarrhea or constipation (or both), this points
to an intestinal cause of symptoms. Moreover, if the pain precedes
and is relieved by bowel movements, IBS is again more likely to be
the diagnosis. Since both IBS and endometriosis are so common, it is
very likely there will be patients with both conditions. This situation
is even more complex since the physician must identify which diag-|
nosis is most relevant to the patient's concerns. Is the endometriosis
asymptomatic (without symptoms)?
     As an aside, I would also like to point out that unnecessary gyne­
cological surgical interventions are not the only type of surgeries that
can occur because of undiagnosed IBS. It is not uncommon for IBS
patients to undergo other types of unnecessary surgeries, such as hav­
ing their appendix or gallbladder removed. IBS can present with
episodes of increased severity ("attacks of IBS") during which timej
abdominal pain may be severe, mimicking a more ominous condition
such as appendicitis or gallstones.
     Birth control pills and menstruation are two other situations of a
gynecological nature that can affect IBS and, in turn, be affected by it.
Many women with IBS experience fluctuations in their symptoms
based on their menstrual cycle. For example, some women with con­
stipation-predominant IBS report that their symptoms improve during
their periods or during their premenstrual cycle. In other cases,
women report that their symptoms worsen during these times, while
still other women experience no change in their symptoms.
     This is similar to Crohn's disease (inflammation of the gastro­
intestinal tract), where one-third of all women with this condition
experience a worsening of their symptoms during pregnancy, while
another third experience improvements, and the final third find that
their symptoms remain the same.
     Currently, we do not fully understand why IBS symptoms can be
affected for better or worse during or near menstruation, and there is
no way to predict if and how such fluctuations will occur. More
research is needed to address these questions.
     The use of birth control pills can also cause fluctuations in IBS
110                                                  A N ew IB S Solution


symptoms. Birth control pills influence a woman's hormone levels,
which may explain why many women who use birth control pills
report changes in their IBS symptoms. Although the medical litera­
ture shows that levels of the hormone progesterone can affect the
motor function of the gastrointestinal tract— creating a positive effect
for some women and a negative effect for others—there is not enough
research to explain how and why fluctuations in hormone levels,
including those caused by birth control pills, can often cause fluctua­
tions in IBS symptoms as well. In the meantime, we do know that even
when hormonal fluctuations improve IBS symptoms, they do not
make the symptoms go away.


FATIG U E, “ BRA IN FO G ,” A N D H YPO G LYCEM IA
A significant percentage of IBS patients also experience regular bouts
of fatigue, in some cases diagnosed as chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS).
CFS is an extremely difficult diagnosis to make with any degree of
accuracy because fatigue is a common symptom of many conditions.
The inability to be certain that one has excluded all possible diseases
makes it difficult to study chronic fatigue patients.
     Researchers have to decide what to include as criteria for their
research protocols. Should they conduct all diagnostic tests related to
all of the disease conditions that cause fatigue? In addition, research­
ers and physicians must also address the problems associated with
determining the cause of each patient's fatigue. For example, it is not
unusual for a patient who is experiencing fatigue to be told by his or
her doctor that there is no discernible cause for the problem. Three
years later, additional tests might reveal that he or she has abnormal­
ly low thyroid function or is anemic due to vitamin B 12 deficiency,
whereas neither of these causative factors was detectable when the
patient was initially tested.
    Because cases of fatigue are difficult to diagnose and understand,
I cannot say with certainty that there is a direct link between IBS
and CFS. However, as mentioned, many IBS patients do complain of
being tired and lacking energy. The vast majority of patients that
I've treated for IBS, who also complained of fatigue, report that their
fatigue significantly improved after they were treated for bacterial
overgrowth, using the Cedars-Sinai protocol. Therefore, bacterial over­
Fibromyalgia and O th er Associated Conditions                       111


 growth is something that might be considered when no other factors
 are found to explain a patient's ongoing fatigue symptoms in the cir­
 cumstance of fatigue's association with IBS.
     Another symptom that is quite common among IBS patients is
 impaired memory and cognitive function that can best be described
 as a type of "brain fog." Many of my IBS patients describe this symp­
 tom as a feeling of mentally "not being all there." The experience fluc­
 tuates to a great degree. Some days, usually when their IBS symptoms
 aren't as bad, the patients feel fine mentally, but on other days, they
 feel like they are mentally dragging themselves around. They lack
 mental focus and feel lethargic. In some cases, they also experience a
 slight degree of hesitancy with words and have trouble expressing
themselves.
     In terms of their mental clarity, many IBS patients find that mid to
late afternoon is the time when their mental abilities are most notice­
ably out of focus. Typically, it is during this period of the day when
they also feel the most fatigue, often to the point where they feel a
need for a nap. One potential explanation for this is hypoglycemia
(low blood sugar). Research conducted by my colleagues and me
showed that nearly all IBS patients experience some degree of hypo­
glycemia after a carbohydrate challenge (taking in more carbs than
usual to check for a reaction). This is especially pronounced among
IBS patients for whom breath testing shows elevated levels of hydro­
gen in the small intestine. In addition, the degree of patient's hypo­
glycemia is directly proportional to the degree of bacterial overgrowth
that is indicated by breath tests. Although we do not completely
understand the reasons for this lack of mental clarity and to what
degree it is caused by or associated with the toxemia that results from
bacterial overgrowth, my colleagues and I routinely see an improve­
ment of these symptoms in our patients following treatment of the
bacterial overgrowth itself. At this time, these reports are purely anec­
dotal, but this is an area that my colleagues and I are continuing to
study.
     There is a medical corollary that supports our patients' reported
improvements of their mental function following treatment with the
Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS. It is found among patients suffering with
liver disease who, as a result, develop encephalopathy, a term used to
describe any type of brain dysfunction including mental confusion.
7 72                                                   A New IB S Solution


    In such cases, the encephalopathy appears associated with the fact
that the liver is no longer able to detoxify bacterial toxins that are
being produced in the gut and entering the liver. In a healthy person,
such toxins are filtered out and eliminated by the liver. But when liver
function starts to fail, the liver is unable to do its job; the toxins then
travel through the bloodstream to affect other parts of the body, and
affect brain function, causing mental confusion.
    One of the treatments for encephalopathy due to liver diseases
such as cirrhosis involves one or more courses of antibiotics. This
approach has been used since the 1960s. When patients with liver dis­
ease who are also experiencing mental confusion and fatigue are given
an antibiotic such as neomycin, they typically recover their mental
alertness and become better oriented in terms of their overall brain
function. Usually, their fatigue will also begin to be reversed.
    Based on these well-documented mental improvements among
liver disease patients who are treated with antibiotics, it is reasonable
to speculate that the "brain fog" that many IBS patients experience is
being caused by the extreme amount of bacterial overgrowth in the
small intestine, which is overwhelming the liver's ability to detoxify.
We don't know for certain whether that is the cause of mental dys­
function among so many IBS patients, but what we do know, based
on our patients' own anecdotal reports, is that the experience of
"brain fog" usually resolves once the bacterial overgrowth is proper­
ly addressed.
    This is something for IBS patients to be aware of, because all too
often, when they mention their experience of "brain fog" to their doc­
tors, the doctors can be dismissive of them and not take their experi­
ences seriously.
    I hope, having read the above, that IBS patients with these symp­
toms will have a better understanding of what might be causing them,
as well as now knowing how they might resolve them.


C O N C LU SIO N
The point of this chapter is to emphasize how the symptoms of IBS can
masquerade as other symptoms and/or exacerbate them. This is an
important aspect of IBS that patients and physicians alike need to con­
sider more carefully. There is a lot more to IBS than its effects on bowel
Fibromyalgia and O th er Associated Conditions                       113


function; it can cause a variety of other symptoms that are often mis­
diagnosed as other conditions. As this chapter makes clear, patients
with IBS often have difficulties with a lack of mental clarity and alert­
ness, as well as fatigue and muscle and gynecological pain.
    In addition, IBS seems to play a role in fibromyalgia, and can often
be concomitantly diagnosed with interstitial cystitis, endometriosis,
and other gynecological conditions. Knowing the contribution of IBS
to the symptoms will undoubtedly prevent unnecessary surgical pro­
cedures on IBS patients. The more that physicians come to understand
the role that the bacterial overgrowth associated with IBS can cause
symptoms (both inside and outside the gut), the more apt they will be
to rule out IBS before proceeding to another diagnosis that could lead
to unhelpful surgeries. In the meantime, it is my hope that people with
IBS will be empowered by the information this chapter contains to
raise these issues with their physicians so that they can be spared "all
in your head" diagnostic labels that will only delay their finding the
relief they are searching for.
                         CHAPTER 9


       Good Questions
    Deserve Good Answers:
                    The IBS Forum

    n this chapter, I answer the questions that I am most frequently

i   asked by my patients with IBS. The questions stem from their per­
    sonal concerns and experiences. Based on my discussions with IBS
patients around the nation, these concerns and questions are shared by
most people with IBS. It is my hope that my answers will be helpful
to the many people with IBS who have not been able to find the
answers to their problem. In addition, my answers will give validation
to patients who often had their concerns and symptoms dismissed as
psychological and stress-based.


M y IB S is w orse w hen I’m stressed, but even w hen I am
relaxed it’s still there. W h a t can I d o a b o u t th is?
The reason I am beginning this chapter with this question is because
many people—physicians and patients alike— are convinced that stress
exacerbates the symptoms of IBS. One statement from IBS patients trig­
gers the "all in your head" button with the physician: the declaration
that "my IBS is worse when I am stressed." The physician then needs to
ask the more important question, "But, do you still have symptoms
even when you are not stressed?" I cannot deny that stress—any kind
of stress—can affect bowel habits, as we mentioned in earlier chapters.
For example, a very serious exam, a problem at work, difficult times in
your home life, and even a happy event, such as getting married or
receiving a promotion, can make anyone's bowels behave differently,
perhaps making underlying IBS symptoms worse.

                                 1 15
776                                                     A New IB S Solution


    This is not unusual, since we also know that stress can affect normal
gastrointestinal function— for example, causing diarrhea due to so-
called "butterflies" in the stomach. Those effects on the gut were men­
tioned in Chapter 3 in relationship to cortisol-releasing factor (CRF), a
hormone that is produced in the brain in response to stress. As we pre­
viously discussed, elevated CRF levels cause the colon to contract exces­
sively. In addition, the stomach will empty more slowly, but most
important, CRF also inhibits the cleansing waves of the gut. So under
stressful circumstances, the colon will be more active and the cleansing
waves will slow down or stop.
    Therefore, it is possible that, number one, stress can exaggerate bac­
terial overgrowth, and number two, it can worsen the diarrhea symp­
toms that many IBS patients already have. But, again, I must emphasize
that stress is not believed to cause IBS, so when the stressful situation
resolves, the patient's symptoms may improve but do not go away. The
patient still suffers every day. I have many patients who tell me that
they'll go to the most relaxing place they know for a couple of weeks on
a vacation and yet they still suffer from their IBS symptoms.
    So, although alleviating stress will not all by itself resolve IBS prob­
lems— as this book makes clear—it still makes good sense to learn how
to deal with stress more successfully so that your symptoms can become
more manageable. There are many ways to cope with stress, but to
describe them in detail is well beyond the scope of this book. Here are
some simple guidelines that can help you get started.
• Practice relaxation exercises. By regularly practicing relaxation exer­
cises, you will become better able to release stored tension and therefore
be less apt to be negatively affected by stress. There are many types of
relaxation exercises, as well as many useful books on this subject. Edu­
cate yourself about this subject, find the exercise or exercises that work
best for you, and make them a part of your daily routine.

• Breathe. When we are under stress, typically our breathing patterns
become shallow. In many cases, we may even unconsciously start to
hold our breath. One of the most effective ways of counteracting stress
is to consciously take deep relaxing breaths as soon as you start to notice
yourself becoming stressed. Doing this for a few minutes at a time
throughout the day can dramatically improve your stress-coping abili­
ties. In addition, you will be aiding your overall health by increasing
your intake of oxygen.
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                     117


•  Meditate or pray. Numerous studies have shown the positive health
benefits that regular times of meditation and prayer can provide. In the
1970s, Herbert Benson, MD, of Harvard Medical School, published stud­
ies showing that meditating as little as ten to twenty minutes each day
triggered what he termed "the relaxation response," a physiological
release of tension accompanied by less stressful brain-wave activity.
There are many methods of meditation. One of the simplest and most
effective is to sit comfortably with your eyes closed and gently focus on
your breathing. As an additional aid, you can mentally affirm, "I am
relaxed and at peace," each time you inhale.

• Examine your beliefs and attitudes. Research shows that stress is
often caused not because of the events we experience in life, but by the
way we subjectively interpret them. Studies also indicate that people
who perceive external events as a personal affront are far more likely to
suffer from chronic stress. Such people tend to take everything that hap­
pens to them personally, when, in fact, many times that is not the case
at all. So, if you are feeling stressed or upset by situations in your life,
examine your beliefs about them. Is the situation you find yourself in
really as bad as you think it is? Many times, the answer is no. Recog­
nizing that can be a powerful way of letting go of upsets, resulting in
greater feelings of peace and equanimity.

• Develop your sense of humor. The late Johnny Carson once told his
television audience, "If you don't have a sense of humor, you better beg,
borrow, or steal one, because sometimes it's the only thing that will get
you through life." Scientific research confirms his point. People who
make a habit of looking for the humorous side of life tend to be happi­
er and therefore less likely to suffer from stress as badly as people who
are more pessimistic. Moreover, the laughter that often results from see­
ing humor in daily life events has actually been shown to provide health
benefits, including improved immune function and the release of stored
tension.
• Make time for yourself and your hobbies. All work and no play will
not only make you dull, it can actually make you sick, according to
research in the field of mind/body medicine. Make it a priority to spend
at least some part of each week doing activities or hobbies you enjoy.
Not only will you be happier, you will also be less stressed.
• Exercise. Regular exercise is another powerful way of releasing stress
118                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


and, of course, provides many other health benefits as well. One of
the easiest and yet most effective forms of exercise is to take a walk
each day.

    None of these methods address the bacterial overgrowth that is at
the heart of most cases of IBS. Nonetheless, by making them a regular
part of your life, you will find yourself becoming much better able to
deal with stress, helping to prevent stress from exacerbating your IBS
symptoms. In addition, you will also improve your overall health.


M y d o c to r d o e s n ’t believe that bacterial overgrow th causes
IBS. H e ’s pretty sm art, so w hy sh o u ld I d o u b t h im ?
I am now asked this question much less frequently than before, since
numerous investigators are publishing studies that confirm our find­
ings. Thus gastroenterologists are now recognizing the role that bacterial
overgrowth plays in IBS. Nevertheless, there are still many physicians
who are unfamiliar with this emerging research link between bacterial
overgrowth and IBS. In some cases, they dismiss the thought altogeth­
er without taking the time to study the evidence.
    Having read this book and examined the evidence for yourself, I
hope you will realize that there is help that truly addresses your IBS
problems. Moreover, it is also important to understand that physicians
are inundated with medical information and have a hard time sifting
through so many areas of research to draw their own conclusions. This
makes them susceptible to the influence of IBS traditionalists.
     I am not trying to "push" a theory, but rather to accelerate people's
knowledge of a concept with scientific evidence. New concepts take
years to be adopted by internists and gastroenterologists. As such, some
physicians continue to say things like, "Well, I don't know anything
about bacterial overgrowth's being a factor in IBS, so therefore it must
not be true."
    We should not be so quick to blame physicians for this lack of
knowledge but perhaps assist them by giving them opportunities to
take interest in the latest information in this area. There are many theo­
ries for many conditions, not only IBS, and sorting through all of these
theories can be confusing for physicians, as well as for their patients.
Many physicians simply do not have time to synthesize the evidence,
given their busy schedules.
Good Questions Deserve G ood Answers                                     119


     Though my colleagues and I initially developed the Cedars-Sinai
protocol for IBS based on the findings of just a few scientific papers we
had published recounting our initial studies, our ultimate goal was to
prove that bacterial overgrowth causes the vast majority of IBS cases in
double-blind studies, and to confirm our findings to justify the initial
study conclusions. More important, other physicians and researchers
are now reproducing our findings with their own studies and clinical
trials. You can mention such studies to your physician (see the Refer­
ences section).
     Compounding the problem about how to most effectively treat IBS
is the fact that many physicians, with the best of intentions, look to
experts within the medical field to guide them in what is correct and
what is not. Unfortunately, sometimes these experts also are unaware of
the latest medical research or still express their doubts. This happened
when bacterial overgrowth was first proposed as a causative factor for
IBS at medical conferences. When certain leading expert gastroenterol­
ogists were asked what they thought about it, they made comments like,
"I don't think it's real. I think we really need more data. It hasn't con­
vinced me yet, so I'm not treating it that way." Such comments initially
delayed the acceptance of the bacterial overgrowth theory of IBS. As
physicians, educators, and leading scientists, my colleagues and I have
to use our influence to further the medical knowledge based on critical
understanding of the scientific data itself, even when it contradicts long-
held theories and beliefs.
     Finally, as a patient, the criteria you should use in evaluating whether
or not your physician is helping you with your health problems is to ask
yourself if the treatment protocols he or she recommends are providing
you with the relief you are looking for. If, after a reasonable period of
time, they are not, then you may need to seek other help or options.


I th ink I have IBS. H o w d o I get a breath test in my area?
The best way to locate a physician in your area who uses breath testing
is to contact QuinTron Instrument Company, the manufacturer of the
machines I recommend. They can be reached at:
      QuinTron Instrument Company
      3712 West Pierce Street
      Milwaukee, WI 53215.
      Phone: 800-542-4448 • www.quintron-usa.com.
120                                                         A N ew IB S Solution




      Two Notes of Caution About Breath Tests
  First, be aware that there are some breath testing kits available in which
  the breath samples are collected in the physician’s office and are then
  mailed to a remote location or lab for analysis. In our experience, the
  breath samples do not travel well and can lead to some inaccuracies. In­
  office testing is preferable. The second note of caution relates to how some
  doctors are conducting breath testing. While the normal test is three hours
  long, some offices are cutting corners. In fact, I have heard that some
  doctors take only one breath sample. Apart from the determination of the
  presence or absence of methane, this does not give enough information.
     The normal test involves a baseline breath sample, after which you
  should be given a sugar syrup (preferably lactulose, although some centers
  are still using glucose) followed by breath samples every 15-30 minutes for
  at least 90 minutes but preferably for 180 minutes (3 hours). If this is
  not happening, then there is reason to be concerned about the quality of
  your breath test.



    Upon contacting them, you will receive an entire list of every cen­
ter in the whole country that does breath testing or that has at least
acquired one of their devices. Preferably, look for a center or physician
with a QuinTron Model SC machine, since this model tests for both
methane and hydrogen.


Since bacteria seem to be involved in IBS, can I p a ss IB S
on to m y fam ily m e m b e rs?
My patients ask me this question very often. When we think of bacte­
ria, we think of it as being contagious in some way, and that it can be
contracted by casual or even more intimate contact. The short answer is
no. However, if we consider that the IBS sequence (and likely bacterial
overgrowth) can be precipitated by food poisoning, we can transmit
bacteria that cause food poisoning to somebody else. In fact, that's how
food poisoning is transmitted. Improper hand washing and improper
food preparation by restaurants and other agents that handle food, such
as grocery stores and so forth, create opportunities for passing on path­
ogenic organisms such as bacteria from one person to another. However,
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                       121


in terms of bacterial overgrowth in IBS, once the food poisoning has
done its damage, the resulting bacterial overgrowth itself is not conta­
gious. You can't give it to somebody else. You can't spread IBS from one
person to another. That being said, there are people who believe that it
runs in families, which brings us to our next question.


Is there a genetic p re d isp o sitio n fo r IB S ?

Currently, the Mayo Clinic is conducting research on genetics as it
relates to IBS. The problem with answering this question with any cer­
tainty has to do with answering such questions as to whether family
members have IBS because of a genetic predisposition or because they
all grew up together and were exposed to the same factors, for example
got food poisoning with the same pathogens. This is a big issue that's
going to be difficult to resolve. I believe it will be very difficult to prove
that IBS is genetic because you can't eliminate other factors shared by
families, such as meals.


If bacterial overgrow th is a po ssib le explanation fo r IBS,
w hy isn ’t IB S ram p a n t in T h ird -W o rld co u n trie s?

This is an excellent question. For example, if Campylobacter causes IBS
because of a bad case of traveler's diarrhea that leads to bacterial over­
growth, why, since Campylobacter is more common in the Third World,
isn't IBS occurring in near-epidemic numbers in these countries, com­
pared with the United States and other Western nations? I suspect the
answer is that in many Third-World countries, by the age of five every­
body has had exposure to Campylobacter and/or other pathogens. Chil­
dren, however, tend to have less severe reactions to such pathogens
when they initially are exposed to them, compared with the severe reac­
tions adults can have.
     In addition, once children are exposed to such pathogens, they often
develop a tolerance to them that minimizes the reactions they might
have to future exposures, compared with people who are not exposed
to such pathogens until they are adults.
    As an example of this—and there have been scientific studies that
confirm this— compare the reactions of an adult from the United States
and an adult living in India to Campylobacter after eating at a restaurant
in India. The person from India will most likely experience only a mild
122                                                     A New IB S Solution


case of food poisoning with only one or two days of diarrhea. The per­
son from the United States, on the other hand, will most likely experi­
ence a prolonged bout of bloody diarrhea and might end up in the
hospital. The difference is that the person from India was probably
already exposed to Campylobacter as a child, and therefore has devel­
oped a tolerance to it. This is akin to the chicken pox. If you develop
chicken pox as a child, you might endure discomfort, but for the most
part it is not a serious health problem. But if you don't develop chick­
en pox until you are an adult, the illness is much more intense and, in
some cases, life threatening. The same thing is true for the mumps.
Mumps among children is not a big deal, since there usually are no
lasting consequences. But when adults get the mumps, it can manifest
as a much more serious and violent illness, and, among men, it can
cause infertility.
    Hepatitis A is another good example of what I am talking about.
The majority of people who live in Third-World countries have been
exposed to hepatitis A when they were children. At most, they might
have developed a little bit of jaundice, but in many cases, they didn't
even develop that, and they soon got over the disease. Almost every
case of a child who gets hepatitis A will resolve without serious conse­
quences. In adults, however, initial exposure to hepatitis A leads to a far
more serious condition. Adult-onset hepatitis A can, in some cases, result
in fulminant hepatic failure, and may even require a liver transplant.
    Therefore, my colleagues and I think that the reason IBS is not
more prevalent in Third-World countries (compared with industrialized
nations) is because the pathogens that set the stage for IBS to occur
cause much more mild immune reactions in children than they do in
adults, and, in general, the vast majority of people in such countries
are exposed to such pathogens at an early age, helping their immune
systems to develop a certain level of immunity to the pathogens as they
get older.


D o e s having IB S increase m y risk fo r colo n cancer?

This is an especially important question when people talk about bacte­
rial overgrowth in relationship to IBS. People often ask me, "What will
happen if I don't treat my IBS or the bacterial overgrowth? What if I
don't want to take an antibiotic? Is something going to happen to me?"
     As far as we currently understand IBS, it is a benign condition in
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                      123


terms of progressing to any kind of cancer. In the 1970s, there was some
data suggesting that when methane was present during breath testing
in humans, or in the colon of humans, there was an increased risk for
colon cancer. However, no researchers said for certain that this was due
to the methane gas or to the methane-producing organisms. Subsequent
studies refuted that possibility and, as far as I know, the issue has never
been looked at again.
     What I tell my patients is that we don't really know that there is a
link between the two diseases, nor do we know if leaving IBS untreat­
ed can cause any other type of damage over time. It's really an issue of
morbidity rather than mortality. People suffer from IBS, but it does not
kill them. However, young productive people with IBS have a compro­
mised quality of life, both socially and at work. So choosing to be treat­
ed or not really depends on what sort of quality of life a person wants.


W h a t a b o u t other potential links between IB S and
in fla m m a to ry gastrointestinal c o n d itio n s such as
C r o h n ’s disease and colitis?
When I was first seeing patients with inflammatory bowel disease dur­
ing my time as a Fellow at Cedars-Sinai, I noticed that many patients
with Crohn's disease would say, "You know, I had a lot of nagging
bowel symptoms for ten years, but people scoped me and they did bar­
ium studies, yet they didn't see anything. Instead, they called my con­
dition IBS. For ten years they've said I had IBS and then, all of a sudden,
I started bleeding, and when they scoped me again, they said I have
Crohn's disease. Why didn't they detect this ten years ago? How could
they have missed it?"
     The answer to that is that they didn't miss it. Instead, what hap­
pened was that this patient was in what could be called a "prodromal,"
or initial, phase of Crohn's disease. Unfortunately, we don't really know
why there is such a long latent period before Crohn's disease fully man­
ifests. Ulcerative colitis, in comparison, does not have a prodromal
phase per se.
    According to a study that my colleagues and I conducted, the aver­
age prodromal phase for Crohn's disease is approximately seven years,
while for ulcerative colitis it is less than a year. As a result, when ulcer­
ative colitis strikes, usually when you go to your doctor he or she is able
to diagnose it right away. Crohn's disease is much more difficult to
72 4                                                    A New IB S Solution


detect in its early stages when, for all intents and purposes, it can pres­
ent with symptoms very much like those of IBS before it ultimately
develops into detectable Crohn's disease.
    This is an important point for physicians and patients to remember
when it comes to labeling someone with IBS. It's not uncommon, once
the label is made, for the patients' gastroenterologists to stop consider­
ing other possibilities as their patients continue to experience IBS symp­
toms. For example, it's understood that a certain proportion of the
population will develop colon cancer over time. If a physician is treat­
ing an IBS patient who has dealt with IBS for a significant period of
time, perhaps fifteen or twenty years, and the patients keeps returning
for follow-up checkups and treatments, eventually it behooves the
physician, as the patient nears the age of fifty, to remember to also
screen for the possibility of colon cancer. This is something that can
become overlooked if the physician relies only on the patients' medical
charts, which list their symptoms as IBS. Doctors still need to remem­
ber that if their patients' IBS symptoms change even slightly that it
could be an indication of something else developing, such as Crohn's
disease or colon cancer. When you have a very common disease such as
IBS, you've got to be mindful that a second condition could develop
alongside of it over time.
    However, I want to stress that just because a person has IBS, there
is no way to say for certain whether he or she zvill go on to develop
another, concomitant condition, nor has any direct link been established
between IBS and other gastrointestinal conditions. However, if you have
IBS and you notice a change in your symptoms, be sure to alert your
doctor about this immediately.


M y d o c to r w an ts to scop e me. D o I really need this?
Even prior to our understanding of the bacterial theory of IBS, there
were, and continue to be, guidelines on the type of workup physicians
should conduct for an IBS patient. The first step was blood tests to
check for anemia, a sedimentation rate test to check for any evidence
of elevated immune-system activity—or, in other words, inflammation
in the body—and then basic chemistry panels to check for kidney fail­
ure or sodium or potassium imbalances in the body. Abnormal blood
tests, blood in the stool or weight loss are often referred to in the IBS
investigative workup as "red flags"—in other words, circumstances in
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                    125


which the physician needs to be more concerned and consider further
testing.
     The other test that is often recommended is a flexible sigmoido­
scopy, which is the use of a short scope inserted up into the colon and
doesn't require sedation. The purpose of this test is to be sure that there
isn't any inflammation in the colon, or other signs of ulcerative colitis.
The decision to conduct a flexible sigmoidoscopy is really a very arbi­
trary one and, in most cases, is not really necessary.
     Contrary to some patients' understanding, for example, physicians
very often miss detecting Crohn's disease with a flexible sigmoidoscopy
since, in order to do so, it is necessary to look all the way through the
colon into the small bowel, where the sigmoidoscope does not reach. It
addition, sigmoidoscopies often miss colon cancer that develops on the
right side of the colon. In fact, it misses so many different colon disor­
ders that the role of flexible sigmoidoscopy in general is now being
questioned. Therefore, the primary question to consider is when should
physicians scope a patient? One of the things that I look for in this
regard is whether or not a patient's IBS symptoms fluctuate. It doesn't
matter if their IBS symptoms are constipation predominant or diarrhea
predominant, or in between; I am looking for changes in their symptom
patterns that might indicate the development of some other type of
health problem. This is a gray area, because no IBS patient has identical
symptoms from day to day. One thing that is absolutely characteristic
of IBS is the number of bowel movements that IBS patients have from
day to day. One day, they may have two bowel movements; the next day
they might have only one; the day after that, they might not have any;
and on day four, they might have three or four. Such fluctuations aren't
really abnormal when it comes to IBS. But if a patient comes to me and
says, "I'm having ten diarrheal bowel movements a day, every single
day," then that's a worrisome symptom to me and merits a colonoscopy,
because IBS, generally speaking, doesn't behave that way. In IBS there
is always some degree of fluctuation in the number of the patient's daily
bowel movements.
     Just as important, if a patient suddenly starts to experience consti­
pation to the point where he or she is having only one very hard bowel
movement a week and this never changes, then that's of concern to
me, too, and I'm more apt to investigate further. The other scenario
where I'm apt to investigate further, and to consider looking for the
possibility of celiac disease with a scope that biopsies the small bowel
126                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


from above, and maybe doing a colonoscopy, as well, is when I treat
the patient's bacterial overgrowth and it comes back immediately. Or
when I do the breath test and the patient doesn't have bacterial over­
growth at all, and therefore bacterial overgrowth is not the explanation
for his or her symptoms. Overall, however, I think performing the
breath test first to determine whether or not bacterial overgrowth is
present actually increases your likelihood of detecting other possible
conditions.
    Summing up, if you notice a change in your IBS symptoms, getting
scoped might be advisable, but rather than suggesting a uniform rule of
thumb, I prefer to make that decision on a case-by-case basis, depend­
ing on each patient's current symptoms status.


W h y d o I feel w orse w hen I have m ilk products, but
even w hen I com pletely elim inate them from m y diet
m y IB S sy m p to m s still persist?
There has been some research from Europe suggesting that part of IBS
development may be due to lactose intolerance. Among my own patients,
if I were to quantitate lactose intolerance symptoms, approximately 80
percent of them either avoid milk and dairy products altogether or rec­
ognize that milk and dairy foods are an issue in terms of creating more
bloating for them. Yet, even when they eliminate milk and dairy prod­
ucts from their diets, they still have IBS. The only difference is that when
they drink milk, their bloating symptoms become worse.
     Part of the reason for this has to do with the fact that most bacteria
rely on sugar as their main ingredient in terms of nourishment. If bac­
teria could have only one food, sugar would be the one thing they
would want. When a person drinks one cup of milk, the amount of lac­
tose it contains requires almost the entire length of the small intestine
to absorb it. Humans are all relatively deficient in the enzyme lactase
necessary to assimilate lactose, and as we age, our lactose intolerance
becomes even more pronounced because our stores of lactase are re­
duced over time. Therefore, if you have an overgrowth of bacteria
and you eat sugar that reaches the farthest parts of the small bowel, it
will further feed the bacterial overgrowth. As the bacteria feed on this
sugar, they ferment it, creating gas. My colleagues and I have shown
this in a study in which, when we conducted breath tests with lactose,
the breath test profile looked identical to the same patient getting a lac­
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                      127


tulose breath test to look for bacterial overgrowth, meaning that what
you're seeing on the lactose breath test using milk sugar is really bacte­
rial overgrowth. We then compared this to the actual lactose tolerance
test, which is the gold standard for determining whether or not a per­
son can assimilate lactose. Only three out of twenty IBS patients had
true lactose intolerance based on the tolerance test. This points out the
fact that using the lactose breath test to screen for lactose intolerance
isn't actually accurate because what the test is likely demonstrating is
bacterial overgrowth in most cases.
     To return to the question at hand, eliminating milk and other dairy
products will not, in and of itself, resolve the problem of IBS. In many
instances, however, it can help to reduce the symptoms of bloating asso­
ciated with IBS, because doing so will reduce the amount of sugar the
bacteria have available to feed on. Abetter solution, of course, would be
to address the bacterial overgrowth directly. See Chapter 6 for dietary
suggestions that may help.


W ill a gluten-free diet help m y sy m p to m s?
A gluten-free diet is used to treat celiac disease, which has symptom
similarities to IBS. To a somewhat lesser degree, this diet is similar to the
popular Atkins Diet in the sense that, in both diets, the person is reduc­
ing carbohydrates (sugars). In the case of a gluten-free diet, you are
switching your carbohydrates more to potato starches and to rice, and
therefore to more simple carbohydrates. The complex carbohydrates
are the ones that come from grain cereals, and that's where gluten,
which is believed to be the protein that causes celiac disease, comes
from. Some people often feel that they might have celiac disease, even
though all their tests for it came back negative, because they do feel
somewhat better on a gluten-free diet. This makes sense because, when
you eliminate gluten-containing foods, you are also eliminating com­
plex carbohydrates, and carbohydrates, like sugar, are what bacteria
thrive upon. If you starve bacteria of carbohydrates, they cannot sustain
their large numbers, so the degree of bacterial overgrowth actually
drops, which, we believe, is what explains why IBS symptoms, includ­
ing bloating, are less pronounced. Again, though, while a gluten-free
diet may provide benefit for IBS patients, it rarely is enough for elimi­
nating the bacterial overgrowth, which should be the primary aim of
any IBS treatment program.
128                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


    To some extent we have confirmed this concept in principle. In a
study we published recently, we were able to completely eradicate bac­
terial overgrowth and facilitate a dramatic improvement in IBS using
the nutritional product Vivonex (see Chapter 6 for full details). Vivonex
is an elemental diet, which means the food that it contains is already
completely predigested. Therefore, when a person consumes this prod­
uct, the food is absorbed so readily into the blood that it does not trav­
el much beyond the first two feet of small intestine (the absorbing area
of the gut of which there are fifteen feet). In the case of bacterial over­
growth where, in most cases, the bacteria are further into the small
intestine than two feet, taking this type of food starves them and they
cannot continue to exist. The overall ability to get rid of bacterial over­
growth with this type of diet for two weeks is nearly 90 percent. The
problem is that this diet is very difficult to tolerate even for brief peri­
ods of time.


W h y is m y IB S w orse w ith m e n stru a tio n ?

This is another one of the questions that I am asked frequently. Unfor­
tunately, this is also a phenomenon that we have little understanding
about. The truth is that we really don't know why women have alter­
ations in their IBS symptoms based on their menstrual cycle. Some
women say that during menstruation, their symptoms—whether they
are constipation or diarrhea predominant—improve, while others say
their symptoms become worse. Why this is so remains to be determined.
We do know, though, that progesterone, which is one of the hormones
involved in the menstrual cycle, has motility effects. That's been proven
scientifically.
    Progesterone is also one of the hormones that are responsible for
nausea and vomiting during the first trimester of pregnancy because it
causes movement disturbances of the stomach. So we know proges­
terone plays a role here as well, in terms of IBS and menstruation, but
how exactly it does so remains unknown. But researchers are looking
into it.


Is there anyth ing I can d o d u rin g m enstru ation to
m inim ize my IB S sy m p to m s?

Once we've gotten rid of bacterial overgrowth, we actually don't see as
Good Questions Deserve Good Answers                                    129


much fluctuation during the menstrual cycle. Therefore, the treatment
approach that we've been discussing throughout this book, which tar­
gets and eliminates bacterial overgrowth, is the best way of dealing with
this issue.


W h y d o m y IB S sym p to m s, such as bloating, becom e
w orse w hen I’m on an airp lan e ? Because o f this, I’m
afraid to fly. W h a t sh o u ld I d o if I have an attack
on the plane?
I've been told by many of my IBS patients that they are afraid to fly
because they are worried that they are going to have a flare-up of their
symptoms on the plane. For example, if you have a sudden onset of
diarrhea, going to the bathroom on the plane is not that easy because
sometimes IBS patients need to spend extra time in the bathroom, to the
consternation of their fellow passengers.
     In addition, sometimes the diarrhea, when it occurs, can be very
foul and therefore disturbing to other passengers, creating an embar­
rassing situation for the person with IBS, as well as a lot of anxiety.
Many IBS patients also often experience an attack of diarrhea within an
hour or so after eating. On top of all of these factors that people with
IBS have to take into account when they fly, almost all drinks that are
served on airplanes contain carbonation, which can exacerbate the
bloating and distension of IBS sufferers even more. In my experience,
I would say the majority of IBS sufferers just avoid eating on planes for
this reason, either because they don't feel that they can handle the meal,
or because they worry that something else might happen symptomati­
cally that they won't be able to control. Sometimes, too, there's such a
dramatic urgency with IBS that you can't afford to be standing in the
back of a plane in a line waiting to use the bathroom. You have to get
to it now. All of these factors compound an IBS patient's problems
when he or she flies.
    As for bloating, because the air pressure inside the plane is not the
same as the air pressure as on the ground—the air pressure inside the
plane is slightly lower than normal sea level (it's set at typical pressure
of an altitude of about 10,000 feet)— IBS patients have a tendency to dis­
tend more because the stomach is at a higher level of pressure relative
to the outside environment, making bloating and abdominal distension
more pronounced once the plane is in the air.
130                                                     A New IB S Solution


Is there anyth ing I can d o to m inim ize the con sequen ces
o f flying?
Unfortunately, there isn't any treatment available for bloating besides
the treatment of the bacterial overgrowth that I've outlined in this book.
Therefore, if a patient is not willing to treat their bacterial overgrowth,
then they really don't have any other type of effective treatment option,
other than to avoid eating before and during flight times, something
that can be impractical during longer flights. Taking Imodium is com­
mon practice for diarrhea-predominant IBS patients. In my experience,
once the bacteria overgrowth is properly treated and eliminated, fly­
ing is usually no longer an issue and antidiarrhea medications aren't
necessary.
                      Conclusion



     n the last ten years a revolution has begun in the study of IBS. This

I    is highlighted by numerous research findings that suggest IBS is
     not a psychological problem. Patients are tired of hearing that IBS
is "all in their head" and that they need to learn to "live with it"
because we (physicians) have nothing to offer. IBS patients should not
be dismissed and may soon not need to "live with it." In this book, I
have highlighted the latest discoveries in IBS that are rational and sci­
entifically proven. Specifically, I discussed the latest developments
surrounding the association between IBS and gut bacteria.
     There is a distinct relationship between having acute gastroenteri­
tis (food poisoning or travelers' diarrhea) and the development of IBS.
A significant percentage of people who get an infectious case of diar­
rhea will go on to develop IBS, suggesting that in certain cases of IBS,
food poisoning is the cause. In this book we discussed the case for
food poisoning in precipitating IBS and what to do about it.
     More important, this book has summarized the data showing that
most IBS patients test positive for bacterial overgrowth. This is a situ­
ation whereby bacteria that are commonly found in the large intestine
now also inhabit parts of the usually sterile small intestine, leading to
the symptoms of IBS. The evidence presented demonstrates how treat­
ment of bacterial overgrowth dramatically improves IBS. We call this
technique the Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS.
     The hope is that this book empowers those with IBS to realize

                                   131
132                                                  A N ew IB S Solution


there is reason for optimism, reason to stop suffering in silence, rea­
son to stop "living" with IBS, and reason to think about treating IBS
again. IBS is a stigmatized condition by the nature of having gas,
bloating, and bowel dysfunction: symptoms that fall prey to ridicule.
It is time for IBS to be recognized as a legitimate condition that can
benefit from new theories and treatment strategies.
                         Glossary




Acupuncture. An alternative or complementary therapy, originating
in ancient China, involving the insertion of thin needles through the
skin at certain points on the body to relieve pain and other various
symptoms.
Acute. Not long lasting; temporary.
Adrenaline. A hormone produced in the adrenal glands that is released
into the bloodstream during times of stress.
Alternative therapy. A nonstandard treatment used in place of conven­
tional medicine.
Alveoli. Air sacs in the lungs.
Amino acids. The building blocks of protein.
Anemia. A red blood cell deficiency.
Aspartame. An artificial sweetener used as a sugar substitute.
Asymptomatic. Without symptoms.
Bacterial overgrowth theory of IBS. A theory in which it is supposed
that the various symptoms of IBS are caused by an overgrowth of bac­
teria (normally relegated to the colon) in the small intestine.
Benign disease. A disease that is not life threatening.
Bowels. See Large intestine; Small intestine.

                                  133
134                                                   A New IB S Solution


Brain fog. Impaired memory and cognitive function.

Brain-gut access. The link between the brain and the gut.
Calcium channel blocker. A drug that blocks the entry of calcium into
cells, thereby causing muscles to relax.

Candidiasis. A systemic yeast infection.
Celiac disease. A gastrointestinal disorder caused by sensitivity to
gluten, with symptoms that include diarrhea and maldigestion/malab­
sorption of nutrients.
Chronic. Long lasting and/or recurrent.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). A disorder with no known cause,
characterized by chronic exhaustion, weakness, and depression.

Colitis. Inflammation of the large intestine.

Colon. See Large intestine.
Colonic therapy. The application of filtered water into the entire length
of the colon via a speculum inserted into the rectum for cleansing
purposes.
Colonoscopy. A procedure in which a colonoscope is placed inside the
colon for diagnostic purposes.
Complementary therapy. A nonstandard treatment used alongside con­
ventional medicine.
Constipation-predominant IBS. A classification of irritable bowel syn­
drome in which the patient experiences mostly constipation.

Control group. In a clinical trial, the subjects who do not receive the
treatment being studied and serve as a comparison.

Corn syrup. See Fructose.

Cortisol-releasing factor (CRF). A hormone that is produced in the
brain in response to stress.

Crohn's disease. A condition of chronic inflammation in the gastroin­
testinal tract.

Cytoscopy. A procedure in which a cytoscope is placed inside the blad­
der for diagnostic purposes.
Glossary                                                            135


Diagnosis of exclusion. A diagnosis that can be made only after all
other possible conditions have been eliminated.
Diarrhea-predominant IBS. A classification of irritable bowel syndrome
in which the patient experiences mostly diarrhea.
Distal. Farthest from the point of origin.
Duodenum. The highest part of the upper bowel.
Dysuria. Painful or difficult urination.
Elemental diet. A diet in which only water and a predigested meal-
replacement product are consumed for the purpose of eliminating
bacterial overgrowth.
Encephalopathy. Any type of brain dysfunction, including mental
confusion.
Endocarditis. Infection of the heart valve.
Endometriosis. A condition in which the type of tissue lining the uterus
(endometrium) grows outside the uterus.
Endorphins. Chemicals produced by the body to block pain signals in
the brain and spinal cord, and are also associated with heightened feel­
ings of well-being and pleasure.
Endoscopy. Direct visualization of the intestines or other internal body
structures with cameras.
Endotoxins. Harmful bacterial byproducts.
Enema. The application of filtered water into the sigmoid colon for
cleansing purposes.
Enzyme. Protein molecules responsible for stimulating chemical reac­
tions in the body.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) test. Measures the speed at
which erythrocytes settle and can help determine if inflammation is
present in the body.
Erythrocytes. Mature red blood cells that play a role in transporting
oxygen to, and carbon dioxide from, the cells, organs, and tissues.
Fibromyalgia. A condition characterized by widespread muscle pain
caused by the tightening and thickening of the myofascia, as well as
many other symptoms, including irritable bowel syndrome.
136                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


Food poisoning. An acute illness of vomiting and/or diarrhea that
occurs after eating toxin-contaminated food or drink.
Fructose. A simple sugar found mostly in fruit.
Gastroenteritis. Inflammation of the stomach and intestines.
Gastroenterologist. A physician who specializes in disease of the gas­
trointestinal tract.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). A digestive disorder in
which gastric acid flows from the stomach into the esophagus.
Gastrointestinal tract. The system of organs involved in the process of
digestion, including the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine,
colon, rectum, and anus.
Glucose. A simple sugar; the main source of energy for the body.
Gluten. A component in wheat.
Gut. See Large intestine; Small intestine.
Gut hyperalgesia. Heightened pain sensitivity in the gut.
Gynecologist. A physician who specializes in treating disorders of the
female reproductive organs.
Heralding episode. An event that triggers the development of a disor­
der. Also called heralding event or trigger event.
Heterogeneous condition. A condition that can manifest in seemingly
opposite ways.
Hypoglycemia. Low blood sugar.
Ileocecal valve. A valve that prevents matter from flowing back from
the large intestine to the small intestine.
Interstitial cystitis. A condition characterized by inflammation and irri­
tation of the bladder. Also known as irritable bladder.
Irritable bladder. See Interstitial cystitis.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). A functional disorder of the colon and
intestines that is characterized by abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea
and/or constipation, gas, and urgency.
Ischemic colitis. Inflammation of the colon due to decreased blood flow
to the colon.
Glossary                                                                137


Lactase. The enzyme the body uses to break down and digest lactose
(milk sugar) in the small intestine.
Lactose intolerance. The inability to digest lactose.
Lactose. A simple sugar found in milk and other dairy products.
Lactulose. Synthetic sugar.

Large intestine. Part of the gastrointestinal tract; a long, tube-like organ
connected to the small intestine at one end and to the anus at the other
end.

Lymphocytes. Small white blood cells used by the body to fight infection.
Maltitol. A sweetener made from corn used as a sugar substitute.
Maltose. A sugar obtained from malted grains.
Mannitol. A sugar alcohol used as a sugar substitute.

Meta-analysis. An analysis of data from two or more studies.
Migrating motor complex (MMC). The third phase of small-bowel
movement that occurs during periods of not eating.
Myofascia. Tissue that holds muscles together.
Nephrologist. A physician who specializes in diseases of the kidneys.
Neurotransmitter. A brain chemical responsible for communication be­
tween nerve cells.
Oligosaccharides. A class of carbohydrate that can contribute to bloating.
Pathogenic bacteria. Bacteria that are capable of causing disease.
Pathologist. A physician who specializes in the diagnosis of disease.
Peptic ulcer. Damage to the stomach lining generally caused by a bac­
teria known as H. pylori. Also called stomach ulcer.
Peristalsis. The wavelike movements of muscles that push solids and
liquid through the gastrointestinal tract.
Placebo. A pill that does not contain any actual active ingredients.
Placebo effect. A change that occurs either physiologically or emotion­
ally in a person due to the use of a substance that has no special prop­
erties; thought to be invoked by the power of suggestion.
138                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


Polyps. Small, abnormal growths sometimes found in the colon and
rectum.
Post-infectious IBS. IBS that occurs after an episode of food poisoning
or parasitic infection.
Probiotics. So-called good bacteria; often taken in supplemental form.
Prodromal phase. The initial stage of a disease.
Progesterone. A female hormone that can have an effect on the motor
function of the gastrointestinal tract.
Rectal hyperalgesia. Heightened pain sensitivity in the rectum.
Rectum. The last section of the large intestine, leading to the anus.
Relaxation response. A physiological release of tension accompanied by
less stressful brain-wave activity.
Rheumatologist. A physician who specializes in disorders character­
ized by inflammation or pain in muscles, joints, or fibrous tissue.
Serotonin. A hormone that controls peristalsis, among its various func­
tions in the body.
Sigmoid colon. The lower part of the colon that connects to the rectum.
Sigmoidoscopy. A procedure in which a sigmoidoscope is placed inside
the sigmoid colon for diagnostic purposes.
Small intestine. The section of the gastrointestinal tract between the
stomach and the large intestine where most digestion occurs.
Sorbitol. A sugar alcohol used as a sugar substitute.
Stomach ucler. See Peptic ulcer.
Strictures. Narrowing of the abdomen.
Substance P. A chemical compound believed to be the chemical that
increases hypersensitivity in the gastrointestinal tract and lowers the
pain threshold in the rectum.
Sucralose. A no-calorie sweetener made from sugar.
Sucrose. Table sugar.
Systemic hyperalgesia. A condition characterized by a heightened sen­
sitivity to pain.
Glossary                                                                139


Tardive dyskinesia. A condition characterized by permanent facial con­
tortion.
Thalamus. A part of the brain that helps regulate and control the relay­
ing of sensory impulses, including pain.
Toxemia. A condition in which endotoxins and other toxic substances
are spread throughout the body through the bloodstream.
Traveler's diarrhea. A case of food poisoning during travel, usually
resulting in diarrhea that lasts for several days.
Ulcerative colitis. Inflammation of the large intestine, resulting in ulcers
in the lining of the colon.
Urologist. A physician who specializes in diseases of the urinary tract.
Vagotomy. A medical procedure that involves the administration of
pharmaceutical drugs to prevent function of the vagus nerve, which
helps to control motor and sensory function.
Xylose. A simple sugar extracted from wood or straw used as a sugar
substitute.
                        References



Acupuncture. National Institutes of Health. Consensus Statement 1997; 15:
1-34.
Agreus L, Svardsudd K, Nyren O, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome and dys­
pepsia in the general population: overlap and lack of stability over time. Gas­
troenterol 1995;109:671-80.
Balsari A, Ceccarelli A, Dubini F,et al. The fecal microbial population in the
irritable bowel syndrome. Microbiologica 1982;5:185-94.
Bardhan KD, Bodemar G, Geldof H, et al. A double-blind, randomized, place-
bo-controlled dose-ranging study to evaluate the efficacy of alosetron in the
treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. Alim Pharm Ther 2000;14:23-34.
Bearcroft CP, Perrett D, Farthing MJ. Post-prandial plasma 5-hydroxytrypta-
mine in diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome: a pilot study. Gut
1998;42:42-6.
Betram S, Kurland L, Lydick E, et al. The patient's perspective of irritable bowel
syndrome. /Pam Pract 2001;50:521-5.
Bohmer CJ, Tuynman HA. The clinical relevance of lactose malabsorption in
irritable bowel syndrome. Eur ] Gastroenterol Hepatol 1996;8:1013-6.
Bommelaer G, Poynard T, Le Pen C, et al. Prevalence of irritable bowel syn­
drome (IBS) and variability of diagnostic criteria. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2004;
28:554-61.
Bradette M, Pare P, Douville P, et al. Visceral perception in health and func­
tional dyspepsia. Crossover study of gastric distension with placebo and dom-
peridone. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36:52-58.

                                      141
142                                                          A N ew IB S Solution


Bradley HK, Wyatt GM, Bayliss CE, et al. Instability in the fecal flora of a
patient suffering from food-related irritable bowel syndrome. / Med Microbiol
1987;23:29-32.
Bueno L, Fioramonti J. Effects of corticotropin-releasing factor, corticotropin
and cortisol on gastrointestinal motility in dogs. Peptides 1986;7: 73-77.
Cahill CM, Dray A, Coderre TJ. Priming enhances endotoxin-induced thermal
hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia in rats. Brain Res 1998;808:13-22.
Camilleri M, Mayer EA, Drossman DA, et al. Improvement in pain and bowel
function in female irritable bowel patients with alosetron, a 5-HT3 receptor
antagonist. Alim Pharm Ther 1999;13:1149-59.
Chun A, Desautels S, Slivka A, et al. Visceral algesia in irritable bowel syn­
drome fibromyalgia, and sphincter of oddi dysfuntion, type III. Dig Dis Sci
1999;44:631-636.
DeCross AJ, Marshall BJ. The role of helicobacter pylori in acid-peptic disease.
Am J Med Sci 1993;306:381-392.
Drossman DA, McKee DC, Sandler RS, et al. Psychosocial factors in the irrita­
ble bowel syndrome. A multivariate study of patients and nonpatients with
irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol 1988;95:701-708.
Drossman DA, Patrick DL, Whitehead WE, et al. Further validation of the IBS-
QOL: a disease-specific quality-of-life questionnaire. Am ] Gastroenterol 2000;
95:999-1007.
Drossman DA, Richter JE, et al., eds. Functional gastrointestinal disorders:
diagnosis, pathophysiology and treatment: a multinational consensus. Boston:
Little, Brown, 1994.
Drossman DA, Ringel Y, Vogt BA, et al. Alterations of brain activity associated
with resolution of emotional distress and pain in a case of severe irritable bowel
syndrome. Gastroenterol 2003;124:754-761.
Drossman DA, Sandler RS, McKee DL, et al. Bowel patterns among subjects not
seeking health care. Gastroenterol 1982;83:529-534.
El-Serag HB. Impact of irritable bowel syndrome: prevalence and effect on
health-related quality of life. Rev in Gastroenterol Dis 2003;3 (Suppl 2):S3-11.
Fass R, Longstreth GF, Pimentel M, Fullerton S, Russak SM, Chiou C-F, Reyes
E, Crane P, Eisen G, McCarberg B, Ofman J. Evidence and consensus-based
practice guidelines for the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome. Arch Intern
Med 2001;161:2081-88.
Gaby AR. Altern Med Rev 2003;8:3.
References                                                                   143


Gade J, Thorn P. Paraghurt for patient with irritable bowel syndrome. A con­
trolled clinical investigation fromgeneral actice. Scand J Prim Health Care
1989;7:23-26.
Galatola G, Grosso M, Barlotta A, et al Diagnosis of bacterial contamination of
the small intestine using the lg [14] xylose breath test in various gastrointesti­
nal diseases. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol 1991;37:169-175.
Gershon MD. Review article: serotonin receptors and transporters—roles in
normal and abnormal gastrointestinal motility. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2004;20:3-14.
Goldstein R, Braverman D, Stankiewicz H. Carbohydrate malabsorption and
the effects of dietary restriction on symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome and
functional bowel complaints. Israel Med Assoc /2000;2:583-587.
Gwee KA. Wee S. Wong ML. Png DJ. The prevalence, symptom characteristics,
and impact of irritable bowel syndrome in an Asian urban community. Am J
Gastroenterol 2004;99:924-931.
Halpert A, Toner BB, Whitehead WE, et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy ver­
sus education and desipramine versus placebo for moderate to severe func­
tional bowel disorders. Gastroenterol 2003;125:19-31.
Harraf F, Schmulson M, Saba L, et al. Subtypes of constipation predominant
irritable bowel syndrome based on rectal perception. Gut 1998;43:388-394.
Hungin AP, Whorwell PJ, Tack J, Mearin F. The prevalence, patterns and impact
of irritable bowel syndrome: an international survey of 40,000 subjects. Aliment
Pharm Ther. 2003;17:643-650.
Husebye E, Hellstrom PM, Sundler F, et al. Influence of microbial species on
small intestinal myoelectric activity and transit in germ-free rats. Am J Physiol
2001 ;280:G368-80.
Jones MP, Craig R, Olinger E. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth is associat­
ed with irritable bowel syndrome: the cart lands squarely in front of the horse.
Am ] Gastroenterol 2001;96:3204-5.
Kanaan SA, Saade NE, Haddad JJ, et al. Endotoxin-induced local inflammation
and hyperalgesia in rats and mice: a new model for inflammatory pain. Pain
1996;66:373-379.
Kellow JE, Eckersley GM, Jones M. Enteric and central contributions to intes­
tinal dysmotility in irritable bowel syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37:168-174.
Kellow JE, Gill RC, Wingate DL. Prolonged ambulant recordings of small bowel
motility demonstrate abnormalities in the irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroen­
terol 1990;98:1208-18.
144                                                           A N ew IB S Solution


Kellow JE, Phillips SF. Altered bowel motility in irritable bowel syndrome is
correlated with symptoms. Gastroenterol 1987;92:1885-93.
Kim HJ, Camilleri M, McKinzie S, et al. A randomized controlled trial of pro­
biotic, VSL #3, on gut transit and symptoms in diarrhea-predominant irritable
bowel syndrome. Alim Pharmacol Ther 2003;17:895-904.
King TS, Elia M, Hunter JO. Abnormal colonic fermentation in irritable bowel
syndrome. Lancet 1998;352:1187-89.
Koide A, Yamaguchi T, Odaka T, et al. Quantitative analysis of bowel gas using
plain abdominal radiograph in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Am J
Gastroenterol 2000;95:1735M1.
Kumar D, Wingate DL. The irritable bowel syndrome: a paroxysmal motor dis­
order. Lancet 1985;Nov 2:873-877.
Lea R, Houghton LA, Reilly B, et al. Is abdominal bloating related to physical
distension in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Gastroenterol 2003;
1-42:A14.
Lea R, Whorwell PJ. Quality of life in irritable bowel syndrome. Pharmacoeco-
nomics 2001;19:643-653.
Lemann M, Dederding JP, Flourie B, et al. Abnormal perception of visceral pain
in response to gastric distension in chronic idiopathic dyspepsia. The irritable
stomach syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1991;36:1249-54.
Lembo T, Munakata J, Nabiloff B, et al. Sigmoid afferent mechanisms in
patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Dig Dis Sci 1997;42:1112-20.
Lind CD. Motility disorders in the irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol Clin
North Am 1991;20:279-295.
Logan AC, Beaulne TM. Altern Med Rev 2002;7:410-417.
Lu B, Hu Y, Tenner S. A randomized controlled trial of acupuncture for irrita­
ble bowel syndrome. Program of the 65th Annual Scientific Meeting of the
American College of Gastroenterology, 2000, New York, NY.
Malinen E, Rinttila T, Kajander K, et al. Analysis of the fecal microbiota of irri­
table bowel syndrome patients and healthy controls with real-time PCR. Am J
Gastroenterol 2005;100:373-382.
Manning AP, Thompson WG, Heaton KW, et al. Towards positive diagnosis of
the irritable bowel syndrome. Br ] Med 1978;2:653-654.
Mayer EA, Gebhart GF. Basic and clinical aspects of visceral hyperalgesia. Gas­
troenterol 1994;107:271-293.
McKee DP, Quigley FM. Intestinal motility in irritable bowel syndrome: is IBS
References                                                                   145


a motility disorder? Part 1. Definition of IBS and colonic motility. Dig Dis Sci
1993;38:1761-72.
McKee DP, Quigley FM. Intestinal motility in irritable bowel syndrome: is IBS
a motility disorder? Part2. Motility of the small bowel, esophagus, stomach,
and gall-bladder. Dig Dis Sci 1993;38:1773-82.
Mearin F, Cucala M, Azpiroz F, et al. The origin of symptoms on the brain-gut
axis in functional dyspepsia. Gastroenterol 1991;101:999-1006.
Mertz H, Morgan V, Tanner G, et al,. Regional cerebral activation in irritable
bowel syndrome and control subjects with painful and nonpainful rectal dis­
tention Gastroenterol 2000;118:842-848.
Mertz H, Nabiloff B, Munakata J, et al. Altered rectal perception is a biological
marker of patients with the irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol 1995;
109:40-52.
Munakata J, Nabiloff B, Harraf F, et al. Repetitive sigmoid stimulation induces
rectal hyperalgesia in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol
1997;112:55-63.
Nabiloff BD, Mayer EA. Sensational developments in irritable bowel syn­
drome. Gut 1996;39:770-771.
Neal KR, Barker L, Spiller RC. Prognosis in post-infectious irritable bowel syn­
drome: a six year follow up study. Gut 2002;51:410-413.
Neal KR, Hebden J, Spiller R. Prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms six
months after bacterial gastroenteritis and risk factors for development of the
irritable bowel syndrome: postal survey of patients. BMJ 71997; 314: 779-782.
O'Mahony L, McCarthy J, Kelly P, et al. Lactobacillus and bifidobacterium in
irritable bowel syndrome: symptom responses and relationship to cytokine
profiles. Gastroenterol 2005;128:541-551.
Patrick DL, Drossman DA, Frederick IO, et al. Quality of life in persons with
irritable bowel syndrome: development of and validation of a new measure.
Dig Dis Sci 1998;43:400-411.
Pimentel M, Chow EJ, Hallegua D, Wallace D, Lin HC. Small intestinal bacter­
ial overgrowth: A possible association with fibromyalgia. J Musculoskeletal Pain
2001;9:107-113.
Pimentel M, Chow EJ, Lin HC. Eradication of small intestinal bacterial over­
growth reduces symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Am ] Gastro
2000;95:3503-06.
Pimentel M, Chow EJ, Lin HC. Normalization of lactulose breath testing cor­
relates with symptom improvement in irritable bowel syndrome: A double­
146                                                          A New IB S Solution


blind, randomized, placebo controlled study. Am / Gastroenterol 2003;98:
412-419.
Pimentel M, Constantino T, Kong Y, Bajwa M. An elemental diet is highly effec­
tive in normalizing the lactulose breath test in patients with bacterial over­
growth. Dig Dis Sci 2004;49:73-77.
Pimentel M, EJ Chow, P Hassard, JJ Ofman, S Fullerton and HC Lin. The preva­
lence of Irritable bowel syndrome in subjects with gastroesophageal reflux dis­
ease. J Clin Gastroenterol 2002;34:221-224.
Pimentel M, Hallegua D, Wallace D, Chow E, Kong Y, Park S, Lin HC. A link
between irritable bowel syndrome and fibromyalgia may be related to findings
on lactulose breath testing. Annals Rheumat Dis 2004;63: 450-452.
Pimentel M, Kong Y, Park S. Breath testing to evaluate lactose intolerance in IBS
correlates with lactulose testing and may not reflect true lactose malabsorption.
Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98:2700-04.
Pimentel M, Kong Y, Park S. IBS subjects with methane on lactulose breath test
have lower post-prandial serotonin levels than hydrogen. Dig Dis Sci 2004;
49:84-87.
Pimentel M, Mayer AG, Park S, Chow EJ, Hasan A, Kong Y. Methane produc­
tion during lactulose breath test is associated with gastrointestinal disease pres­
entation. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:86-92.
Pimentel M, Soffer EE, Chow EJ, Lin HC. Lower frequency of MMC is found
in IBS subjects with abnormal breath test suggesting bacterial overgrowth. Dig
Dis Sci 2002;47:2639-43.
Prior A, Maxton DG, Whorwell PJ. Anorectal manometry in irritable bowel
syndrome: differences between diarrhoea and constipation predominant sub­
jects. Gut 1990;31:458-462.
Rajagopalan N, Kurian G, John H. Symptom relief with amitriptyline in the irri­
table bowel syndrome. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1998;13:738-741.
Richter JE, Barish CF, Castell DO. Abnormal sensory perception in patients
with esophageal chest pain. Gastroenterol 1986;91:845-852.
Ritchie J. Pain from distension of the pelvic colon by inflating a balloon in the
irritable colon syndrome. Gut 1973;14:125-132.
Robson KM, Kakullavarapu J, Lembo T. Bacterial overgrowth and irritable
bowel syndrome: a look at prevalence, symptoms and quality of life. Am ] Gas­
troenterol 2003;98:S271.
Saggioro A. Probiotics in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. J Clin Gas­
troenterol 2004;38:sl04-106. Saggioro A. Erratum. /Clin Gastroenterol 2005;39:261.
References                                                                    147


Shaw AD, Davies GJ. Lactose intolerance: problem in diagnosis and treatment.
/ Clin Gastroenterol 1999;28:208-216.
Silverman DH, Munakata JA, Ennes H, et al. Regional cerebral activity in nor­
mal and pathological perception of visceral pain. Gastroenterol 1997; 112:64-72.
Simren M, Ringstrom G, Agerforz P, et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
is not of major importance in the irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol
2003;124:A163.]
Spiller RC. Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol 2003; 124:
1662-71.
Spiller RC, Jenkins D, Thornley JP, et al. Increased rectal mucosal enteroen-
docrine cells, T-lymphocytes, and increased gut permeability following acute
Campylobacter enteritis and in post-dysenteric irritable bowel syndrome. Gut
2000;47:804-811.
Steffen R, Sack DA, Riopel L, et al. Therapy of travelers' diarrhea with rifaximin
on various continents. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98:1073-78.
Steinhart MJ, Wong PY, Zarr ML. Therapeutic usefulness of amitriptyline in
spastic colon syndrome. Int J Psychiatry Med 1981;11:45-57.
Stotzer PO, Bjornsson ES, Abrahamsson H. Interdigestive and postprandial
motility in small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Scand J Gastroenterol 1996;
31:875-880.
Szurszewski JH. A migrating electric complex of the canine small intestine. Am
J Physiol 1969;217:1757-63.
Tabas G, Beaves M, Wang J, et al. Paroxetine to treat irritable bowel syndrome
not responding to high-fiber diet: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Am
J Gastroenterol 2004;99:914-920.
Tache Y. Corticotropin releasing factor receptor antagonists: potential future
therapy in gastroenterology? Gut 2004;53:919-921.
Thompson DG, Laidlow JM, Wingate DL. Abnormal small-bowel motility
demonstrated by radiotelemetry in a patient with irritable colon. Lancet
1979;Dec 22:1321-23.
Thompson WG. The functional gastrointestinal bowel disorders. In DA Dross­
man (ed.) The functional gastrointestinal disorders. Boston, Little, Brown, 1994,
ppll7-134.
Thompson WG, Heaton KW. Functional bowel disorders in apparently healthy
people. Gastroenterol 1980;79:283-288.
Tolliver BA, Jackson MS, Jackson KL, et al. Does lactose intolerance really play
a role in the irritable bowel syndrome. J Clin Gastroenterol 1996;23:15-17.
148                                                        A N ew IB S Solution


Vantrappen G, Janssens J, Hellemans J, Ghoos Y. The interdigestive motor com­
plex of normal subjects and patients with bacterial overgrowth of the small
intestine. ] Clin Invest 1977;59:1158-66.
Vasinder GB, Stolk MF, Ke MY, et al. Micturition is associated with phase III of
the interdigestive migrating motor complex in man. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;
98:66-71.
Viewpoint on Acupuncture. World Health Organization. Geneva, Switzerland;
1979.
Vernia P, Ricciardi MR, Frandina C, et al. Lactose malabsorption and irritable
bowel syndrome. Effect of a long term lactose-free diet. Ital J Gastroenterol
1995;27:117-121.
Vesa TH, Seppo LM, Marteau PR, et al. Role of irritable bowel syndrome in sub­
jective lactose intolerance. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;67:710-715.
Walker K, Dray A, Perkins M. Development of hyperthermia and hyperalgesia
following intracerebroventricular administration of endotoxin in the rat: effect
of kinin B1 and B2 receptor antagonists. Immunopharmacology 1996;33:264-269.
Walsh JW, HAsler WL, Nugent CE, et al. Progesterone and estrogen are poten­
tial mediators of gastric slow-wave dysrhythmias in nausea of pregnancy. Am
J Physiol 1996;270:G506-G514.
Wang SX, Wu WC. Effects of psychological stress on small intestinal motility
and bacteria and mucosa in mice. World J Gastroenterol 2005; 11:2016-21.
Whitehead WE, Holtkotter B, Enck P, et al. Tolerance for rectosigmoid disten­
sion in irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol 1990;98:1187-92.
Whitehead WE, Palsson OS. Is rectal pain sensitivity a biological marker for
irritable bowel syndrome: Psychological influences on pain perception. Gas-
toenterol 1998;115:1263-71.
Wilson S, Roberts L, Roalfe A, et al. Prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome: a
community survey. Br ] Gen Pract. 2004;54:495-502.
Xiao ZL, Pricolo V, Biancani P et al. Role of progesterone signaling in the reg­
ulation of G-protein levels in female chronic constipation. Gastroenterol 2005;
128:667-675.
                              Index



Abdominal distension, 22, 53, 54           Antibiotic treatment as part of
   flying and, 129                             Cedars-Sinai protocol, 72-75
   testing for, 55                         Antibiotics
Abdominal pain, 1,12, 22, 53,                and liver disease patients, 112
     107-108,109                             and Vivonex, 76
Acupuncture, as an alternative IBS           See also Neomycin; Rifaximin.
     therapy, 98-100                       Antidepressant medications, 3
Acute gastroenteritis, antibiotics           side effects of, 17
     and, 45. See also Food                  fallacy and dangers of
     poisoning.                                prescribing for IBS, 16-17
Adhesions on the bowel, bacterial          Antidiarrhea medications, 100
     overgrowth and, 63                    Antiflatulent drugs, 100
Adrenaline, 34                             Antispasmodic medications,
Age                                            100-101
   bacterial overgrowth and, 63            Aspartame, 79
   post-infectious IBS and, 41             Atkins Diet, 95,127
AIDS/HIV-related bowel disease,
     bacterial overgrowth and, 63          B. breve BR0, 92
Alosetron, 4, 24-25                        B. infantis, 92
Alternative therapies for IBS,             Bacteria
     91-102                                   facts about, in the human body,
American College of                             49
     Rheumatology, 106                        “good" and “bad," 47-50, 91-93
American Journal of                        Bacterial overgrowth, 13, 53-66
     Gastroenterology, 57                     antibiotics and, 57, 58-59
Amitriptyline, 3,16                           association of IBS with, 20
Amoeba, 38, 41, 50                            breath tests and, 56-59
Annals of Rheumatology, 105                   causes of, 59, 61-62, 63

                                     149
150                                                    A N ew IB S Solution


   colon cancer risk and, 122-123      Bloating. See Abdominal distension.
   component of IBS, 4-5               Blood testing, 70
   dealing with doubtful               Bowel movements, normal
     physicians, 118-119                    fluctuation of, 125
   dietary guidelines to eradicate,    Brain fog, IBS and, 111-112
     78-81. See also Elemental diet    Brain-gut axis, 2-3, 33
     (Vivonex) as part of Cedars-      Brain-imaging studies, problems
     Sinai protocol,                        with, 32-33
   in duodenum, 59                     Breath tests, 56-59
   endometriosis and, 63                  double-blind study, 58-59
   fatigue and, 110-111                   fibromyalgia patients and, 105
   fibromyalgia patients and, 105         how they are performed, 60-61
   gaining acceptance for theory          notes of caution, 120
     of, 56                               obtaining in your area, 119-120
   gluten-free diet and, 127           Breathing exercises to relieve
   hypoglycemia and, 111                    stress, 116
   ileocecal valve and, 63
   interstitial cystitis and, 107      Calcium channel blockers, 97
   Rome criteria's failure to          Campylobacter, 40, 41, 46,121
     address, 23                       Carbohydrate sources, acceptable,
   stomach acid and, 63                    80
   stress and, 116                     Carbohydrates, 95
   surgery and, 63                     Carbon dioxide, 60, 61
   Susan's case of, 57                 Carson, Johnny, 117
   symptoms of, 23                     Cedars-Sinai (Medical Center), 53,
   treating. See Cedars-Sinai              56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 69
     protocol for treating IBS.        Cedars-Sinai protocol for treating
Bacterial resistance, 73                   IBS, 69-89
Bacterial source of gas, 55-56           antibiotic treatment and
Bacterial toxins. See Endotoxins.          restoring cleansing-wave
Beans, 80                                  function, 72-75
Belching, 12                             case history, 87-89
Beliefs, examining, to relieve           dietary strategies, 77-81
     stress, 117                         elemental diet (Vivonex), 75-77
Benson, Herbert, 117                     fibromyalgia and, 106
Bentyl, 101                              menu plan, 81-86
Beverages, moderating intake of          pregnancy and, 75
     certain, 81                         recommended tests, 71
Bifidobacteria, 92, 93                   testing phase of, 69-72
Bifobacterium bifidum, 47-48, 92, 93   Celiac disease, 20,127
Birth control pills, 109-110             scoping for, 125-126
Index                                                                          151


   symptoms of, 70                           bacterial overgrowth and, 63
   testing, 70                             Cryptosporidium parvum, 38
Centers for Disease Control and
     Prevention, 13                        Dairy products, 81
Chang, Lin, 104                            Diagnosis of exclusion, 19, 20, 56
Cheese, 80                                 Diarrhea, 3, 5,11,12,14,15,19, 20,
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS),                 22, 23, 33, 40, 41, 43, 44, 53, 62,
     IBS and, 110                               64, 66, 70, 71,116,122
Cilansetron, 4, 25                            acute, post-infectious IBS and, 4
Cleansing waves, 61-62, 93                    acute infectious, 38
   interstitial cystitis and, 107             flying and, 129-130
   function, 78, 79                           medications for. See
   restoring function of, as part of            Antidiarrhea medications,
     Cedars-Sinai protocol, 74-75             parasitic infection and, 50
Coffee, 81                                    See also Diarrhea-predominant
Colitis. See Ulcerative colitis.                IBS; Traveler's diarrhea.
Collins, Stephen, 42                       Diarrhea-predominant IBS, 3, 21,
Colon cancer, 71                                23, 24, 25, 92
   risk of, and IBS, 122-123                  antidepressants and, 16
   screening for, 124                         gas production and. See
Colonic inertia, 26                             Hydrogen, relationship to IBS.
Colonic therapy, 101-102                   Diet
Colonoscopy, 19-20, 70-71                    alternative IBS therapy, 93-95
Constipation, 3, 4, 5,10,12,15,16,           elemental, 96
     19, 22, 23, 24, 33, 37, 50, 53, 54,     menu plan, 81-86
     59, 64, 71, 78, 98,101,109              strategies, as part of Cedars-
   gender differences, 26                       Sinai protocol, 77-81
   See also Constipation-                  Digestive Diseases and Sciences, 96
     predominant IBS.                      Distension. See Abdominal
Constipation-predominant IBS, 3,               distension.
    21, 23, 24                             Donnatal, 101
  approved drug for, 25                    Drossman, Douglas, 17
  gas production and. See                  Duodenum, bacterial overgrowth
    Methane, relationship to IBS.              in, 59
  metoclopramide and, 26
  menstrual cycle and, 109                 £. coli, 47, 48
Corn syrup, 79, 94                         Elemental diet (Vivonex), as part
Cortisol-releasing factor (CRF),                of Cedars-Sinai protocol,
    34-35, 65,116                               75-77, 96,128. See also
  antagonists, 35                               Bacterial overgrowth, dietary
Crohn's disease, 20, 71,109,123-124             guidelines to eradicate.
152                                                     A New IB S Solution


Encephalopathy, and Cedars-Sinai          post-infectious IBS and, 39
    protocol for IBS, 111-112             tips for avoiding, 44-45
Endocarditis, case of, with             Foods, "high-residue," 80
    probiotics, 48                      Fructose, 79, 80, 94
Endometriosis                           Fruit intake, moderating, 80
  bacterial overgrowth and, 63          Fruit juice, 79
  diagnosis of, 108,109                 Functional bowel disease, IBS
Endorphins, 98                              type, 21
Endoscopy renaissance, 14
Endotoxins, 105                         Gas, medications for. See
Enemas, 101-102                             Antiflatulent drugs.
Entamoeba, 50. See also Amoeba.         Gas production, 4. See also
Equal, 79                                   Flatulence.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate          Gastroneurology, 32
    (ESR) test, 70                      Gas-X, 101
Erythromycin, 74, 75                    Gender, post-infectious IBS and,
Exercise to relieve stress, 117-118         41
                                        Gershon, Michael, 33, 34
Fatigue, 12, 50,110,112                 Giardia, 38, 41, 50
FDA. See Food and Drug                  Glaxo Wellcome, 24
    Administration.                     Glenmullen, Joseph, 17
Fiber                                   Glucose, 77, 79, 95
   problem with, 78                     Glucose breath test, 60
   products, 101                        Gluten-free diet, 127
Fibromyalgia, 64                        Granisetron, 4
   IBS and,103-106                      Gut, the perception of pain in IBS
Flatulence, 12, 53, 54, 55,101              and. See Gut hyperalgesia and
Flexible sigmoidoscopy, 125                 IBS.
Fluid intake, importance of, 79         Gut bacteria, in patients, problem
Flying, IBS symptoms and,                   with studying, 58
     129-130                            Gut hyperalgesia and IBS, 31-32.
Food and Drug Administration                See also Systemic hyperalgesia.
     (FDA), 24, 25, 46                  Gut hypersensitivity, 66
Food poisoning, 4,120-121               Gut speed, 66
   as a heralding event/episode,        Gynecological problems, IBS and,
    39-40                                   107-110
   bacteria that cause, tolerance to,
      121-122                           H. pylori, 2,13, 56, 59
  cleansing-wave activity and, 62       Hard end point outcome, example
  coping with, 43-47                        of, 26-27
  Francis's case of, 37-38              Health insurance, 18
Index                                                                    153


Heart disease, understanding of,      Interstitial cystitis, IBS and, 106-107
    2, 11-12                          Irritable bladder. See Interstitial
Helicobacter pylori. See H. pylori.        cystitis, IBS and.
Hepatitis A, tolerance to, 122        Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 1
Heralding events/episodes, 39,           alternative therapies for, 91-102
    40, 41, 62                           antidepressants and, 3,16-17
Hobbies and activities to relieve        as a diagnosis of exclusion, 19,20
    stress, 117                          at a glance, 12
Hormonal fluctuations, and IBS           bacterial component of, 4-5
    symptoms, 110                        bacterial overgrowth link, study
Humor, developing, to relieve              confirming the, 57
    stress, 117                          brain fog and, 111-112
Hydrogen, 60, 61,105, 111                colon cancer risk and, 122-123
  relationship to IBS, 62-65             conditions that appear similar
Hydrogen sulfide, 60                       to, 15
Hypoglycemia, 111                        fatigue and, 110
                                         fibromyalgia and, 103-106
IBS. See Irritable Bowel Syndrome.       gender differences, 25-26
IBS Quality of Life Score (IBS-          genetic predisposition for, 121
     QOL), 16                            gut's nerve network and, 31-35
IBS symptoms                             gynecological problems and,
   flying and, 129-130                     107-110
   hormonal fluctuations and, 110        health coverage and, 18
   menstruation and, 128-129             incidence of anxiety and
   milk products and, 126-127              depression in patients with, 16
   See also Abdominal distension;        incidence of, in the U.S., 12
     Abdominal pain; Constipation;       interstitial cystitis and, 106-107
     Diarrhea.                           lack of funding for, 1-2
Ileocecal valve, 61                      link to other inflammatory
   bacterial overgrowth and, 63            gastrointestinal conditions,
Imodium, 44,100                            123-124
Impaired cognitive function. See         Margaret Anne's case, 9-11
     Brain fog, IBS and.                 media's portrayal of, 1
Impaired memory. See Brain fog,          medical community's new
     IBS and.                              approach to, 29
Inflammation                             percentage of people affected
   elevated levels, 70                     by, 1
   post-infectious IBS and, 42-43        placebo effect in, 27-29
Inflammatory gastrointestinal            post-infectious. See Post-
     conditions (other), IBS and,          infectious IBS.
     123-124                             problem with labels, 20, 21
154                                                     A N ew IB S Solution


   psychological label, 11,13-15         Maltitol, 94
   psychological problems and, 2         Maltose, 94
   psychological profile of patients     Manning criteria, 22, 53
    with, 2                              Mannitol, 79
   reasons for subcategorizing,          Marshall, Barry, 13
      21-22                              Mayo Clinic, 121
   ruling out other causes, 19-20        Meditation and prayer to relieve
   scoping and other tests,                  stress, 117
     necessity of, 124-126               Menstruation, 109
   stigma associated with, 15,17           IBS symptoms and, 128-129
   stress and, 2                         Menu plan, 81-86
   subcategories of, 3, 21               Methane, 60, 61, 72,123
   symptoms of, 12                         relationship to IBS, 62-65
   treating. See Cedars-Sinai            Metoclopramide, 26-27
     protocol for treating IBS.          Milk, 80
   unified theory of, 65-66              Milk products, IBS symptoms and,
Ischemic colitis, alosetron and,             126-127
     24-25                               Morphine, studies using, 62
                                         Muscle spasms and cramping,
King, T. S., 55                              medications for. See
Koide, A., 55                                Antispasmodic medications.
                                         Myofascia, 103
L. acidophilus, 92
L. bulgaricus, 92                        National Institutes of Health
L. plantarum LPO 1, 92                       (NIH), 98
L. salivarius, 92                        Nausea, 11,12,14,17, 44, 50,128
Lactaid milk, 77, 80, 81                 Neomycin, 58, 72, 73, 74,106
Lactase, 94,126                          Nerve network, in GI tract, 31-35
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 47-48,92,93   Novartis (Nutrition), 26, 76
Lactose, 77, 79, 81, 94,126              Nutrasweet, 79, 81
Lactose intolerance, 77, 94,126-127
Lactulose, 79, 94                        Pain, 15,16
Lactulose breath test, 60                  abdominal. See Abdominal pain,
Lentils, 80                                acupuncture for relief of, 98-99
Lin, Henry C., 57                          altered perception of, 2-3, 31,
Liver disease                                54,101
   antibiotics in patients with, 112       endotoxins and, 105
   Cedars-Sinai protocol for IBS           muscle. See Fibromyalgia,
     and, 111-112                          pelvic. See Pelvic pain,
Lotronex, 24                               stomach, 44
Lymphocytes, 61                            substance P and, 66
Index                                                                  155


Pancreatic enzymes                     QuinTron Instrument Company,
    as an alternative IBS therapy,        61,119,120
     97-98
   bacterial overgrowth and, 63        Reglan. See Metoclopramide.
Pancreatic function, bacterial         Relaxation exercises, 116
     overgrowth and, 63                Relaxation response, 117
Parasites, 50                          Rifaximin, 46, 72, 73, 74
Parasitic infection, 50                Robson, K.M., 59
   post-infectious IBS and, 38,39,40   Rome criteria, 3, 21, 39, 53
Peas, 80                                  two sections of, 22
Pelvic pain, 108,109                   Rome 2 criteria, 22-23
Pendergraft, Marjorie, case history,
     87-89                             Salix Pharmaceuticals, 46, 72
Peppermint capsules, 97                Salmonella, 41
Peptic ulcers. See Stomach ulcers,     Scoping and other tests, necessity
     understanding of.                      of, 124-126
Peristalsis, 3-4, 24                   Serotonin, 3, 4, 23-26, 33, 66
Physical activity, 81                  Serotonin excess/deficiency, 29
Placebo effect, 27-29                  Serotonin 3 receptor blockers, 25
Post-infectious IBS, 4, 37-50          Shigella, 41
   dramatic example of, 42             Simethicone, 54
   Francis's case of, 37-38            Simren, M., 59
   inflammation and, 42-43             Sleep disturbances, 12
   risk factors for developing,        Social stigma associated with IBS,
     40-41                                  15,17-18
   Sally's case of, 38                 Soda, 81
   stress level and, 41                Soft end point outcome, example
Pregnancy, Crohn's disease and,             of, 27
     109                               Soft versus hard end point, 27
Probiotics, 47-48                      Solvay, 25
  as an alternative IBS therapy,       Sorbitol, 78, 79, 94, 95
     91-93                             South Beach Diet, 95
Progesterone, 110,128                  Soy products, 80, 81
Protein sources, acceptable, 80        Splenda. See Sucralose.
Psychological label of IBS, 11,        Stomach acid, bacterial
     13-15                                 overgrowth and, 63
Psychological scrutiny, 2              Stomach ulcers, 56
Psychological trauma, 2                   understanding of, 2,13
                                       Straining, 22
Qi, 98                                 Stress, 2, 65
Quigley, Eamonn, 48                       acupuncture and, 98, 99
156                                                       A N ew IB S Solution


   CRF and, 34-35                            Sally's case of, 38
   effects on gut function, 14            Treatments for IBS, less-effective,
   IBS and, 115-118                           100-102
   severe psychological, 15               Tricyclic antidepressants, 3,16,17
   social stigma and, 15,17
   See also Psychological label of IBS.   Ulcerative colitis, 71,123,125
Stress level, post-infectious IBS         Ulcers. See Stomach ulcers,
     and, 41                                  understanding of.
Stress reduction guidelines, 116-118      Urgency, 12, 22,129
Strictures, bacterial overgrowth          Urination, difficult and painful.
     and, 63                                  See Interstitial cystitis.
Substance P, 66
Sucralose, 77-78, 79, 81, 94, 95          Vagotomy, 34
Sucrose, 79                               Vagus nerve, 34
Sugar, bacteria and, 94                   Vegetables, acceptable amounts,
Sugar substitutes, 77-78, 94. See             80-81
     also Sweeteners to avoid.            Vivonex, 96,128
Sugar-free gum, 79                          as part of Cedars-Sinai protocol,
Surgery on the small intestines,              75-77
     bacterial overgrowth and, 63           cautions, 76
Sweeteners to avoid, 79. See also         Vomiting, 41, 44, 50, 71,128
     Sugar substitutes.
Systemic hyperalgesia, 105-106.           Warning signs not associated with
     See also Gut hyperalgesia and           IBS, 71
     IBS.                                 Warren, ]. Robin, 13
                                          Water, 80, 81
Tache, Yvette, 34                         White blood cell counts, elevated.
Tardive dyskinesia,                          See Inflammation, post-
    metoclopramide and, 26-27                infectious IBS and.
Tea, 81                                   Whitehead, William, 31, 54
Tegaserod, 4, 25, 26, 29                  World Health Organization
   dismissal of studies on, 28, 29           (WHO), 98
Testing phase of Cedars-Sinai
    protocol, 69-72                       Xifaxan. See Rifaximin.
Thyroid testing, 71                       Xylose breath test, 60
Toxemia, 105
Traditional diet for IBS, 78              Yogurt, 80
Traveler's diarrhea, 121
  rifaximin for, 46, 73                   Zelnorm, 25, 74, 75
