First Published in 2013 by Victory Belt Publishing Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Sarah Ballantyne

All rights reserved

No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without prior written permission from the
publisher.

ISBN 13: 978-1936608393 (paperback)
         978-1628600254 (ebook)

The information included in this book is for educational purposes only. It is not intended nor implied
to be a substitute for professional medical advice. The reader should always consult his or her
healthcare provider to determine the appropriateness of the information for their own situation or if
they have any questions regarding a medical condition or treatment plan. Reading the information in
this book does not create a physician-patient relationship.

Victory Belt ® is a registered trademark of Victory Belt Publishing Inc.

RRD0113

SP_ver_b
  For Adele and Mira…
   …may my knowledge
compensate for my genetics
    to break the cycle.
Table of Contents



Foreword by Robb Wolf
A Message from Sarah
Preface: Putting the Puzzle Pieces Together
Acknowledgments
Introduction: The Epidemic of Autoimmune Disease




Part 1: The Cause
Chapter 1: The Causes of Autoimmune Disease
A Primer on Proteins, Antibodies, and the Immune System
The Major Contributors to Autoimmune Disease
What Do Autoimmune Diseases Have in Common?
Changing What Is in Your Power to Change
Chapter 1 Review

Chapter 2: Dietary Factors That Contribute to Autoimmunity
Nutrient-Poor Diets
Foods That Cause a Leaky Gut and Gut Dysbiosis
Inflammatory and Immunogenic Foods
You Made It!
Summary of Foods to Avoid on the Paleo Approach
Chapter 2 Review

Chapter 3: Lifestyle Factors That Contribute to Autoimmune Disease
Stress Management (or Lack Thereof)
Why Circadian Rhythms Matter
Sleep (Lack of Quality, Quantity, or Both)
Physical Activity
Hunger Hormones Revisited: The Effect of Meal Frequency
Medications
Putting It All Together
Chapter 3 Review

Chapter 4: Moving Forward
On the Shoulders of Giants
The Paleo Approach Is a Comprehensive Approach
Working with Your Doctor
Time to Jump In with Both Feet

Chapter 5: The Paleo Approach Diet
Meat, Poultry, and Seafood
Vegetables and Fruit
Healthy Fats
Macronutrient Ratio
Probiotic Foods
Navigating Spices
“What Can I Drink?”
Food FAQs
Ready, Set…
Summary Guide

Chapter 6: The Paleo Approach Lifestyle
Managing Meals
Manage Your Stress
Protecting Your Circadian Rhythms
Get Plenty of Low-Intensity Activity
Improving Your Environment
Chapter 6 Review

Chapter 7: Implementing the Paleo Approach
“Is This Really a Cure?”
Transition
Preparing for the Paleo Approach
Getting Through the First Month
How Long Will It Take to Heal?
How Strict Do You Have to Be?
Getting to a Healthy Weight
FAQs
Set Yourself Up for Success
Chapter 7 Review

Part 2: The Cure
Chapter 8: Troubleshooting
When to Start Troubleshooting
Poor Digestion
The Need for Probiotics
Severe Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
Persistent Infections and Parasites
The Gut-Brain Axis
Allergies, Intolerances, and Sensitivities
The Need for Organ-Function Support
Tightening Up Blood-Sugar Regulation
Micronutrient Deficiencies
Does Your Body Need Help Repairing Your Gut?
Does Your Body Need Help Modulating Your Immune System?
A Few Notes on Supplements
Troubleshooting Checklist

Chapter 9: The Long Haul
When Do I Get to Reintroduce Foods?
How to Reintroduce Foods
Suggested Order of Reintroduction
Why Do I React So Violently to a Food I Used to Eat All the Time?
Lifelong Health



Glossary
Summary Guides




    Foods to Avoid
    How to Avoid Added and Refined Sugars
    How to Avoid Wheat/Gluten
    How to Avoid Soy
    How to Avoid Corn
    Foods to Include
    Selenium Health Benefit Values of Fish and Shellfish
    Eating Seasonally


Nutrient Tables


    VITAMINS
    Vegetables
    Fruit
    Meat
    Seafood




    MINERALS
    Vegetables
    Fruit
    Meat
    Seafood




    SUGARS AND FATS
    Vegetables
    Fruit
    Meat
    Seafood




    AMINO ACIDS
    Vegetables
    Fruit
    Meat
    Seafood


Recommended Reading and Resources
References
Preview of The Paleo Approach Cookbook
Testimonials
Foreword
by Robb Wolf

New York Times bestselling author of The Paleo Solution

My first thought when I flipped through my review copy of The Paleo Approach was “holy cats.” My
second thought was “this is a game-changer,” and my third thought was “wow, I didn’t know that”
(and I know a lot). My fourth, fifth, and sixth thoughts were a mix of all of the above. Even with the
abundance of alternative health and Paleo resource books and cookbooks currently available, you
have never seen a book like this.
      There’s a reason no one has written a book like this before: Sarah Ballantyne, PhD, is uniquely
qualified to do so. Drawing from her background in medical research, insights gleaned from over
1,200 scientific studies, and her own personal health battles, Sarah has compiled a comprehensive
collection of diet and lifestyle recommendations that will regulate your immune system so your body
can stop attacking itself and finally heal.
      Sarah has a remarkable ability to explain complex scientific concepts in a way that is easy to
understand and yet not oversimplified. She has applied this talent along with some kickass technical
illustration skills to create a visually stunning guidebook aimed at solving a very important public
health problem: autoimmune disease. With autoimmune disease estimated to affect more than 50
million Americans and counting, the need for a better solution than a life of fatigue, pain, and
medication side effects is in high demand. And The Paleo Approach delivers.
      In The Paleo Approach, Sarah explains in detail how the foods we eat interact with our bodies
to directly impact our health, all with a writing style that makes you feel like you’re sitting around the
kitchen table discussing health with a close friend…a damn smart close friend! As you read through
this book, you will find yourself learning detailed cell biology and biochemistry, understanding the
many components of the immune system and the complex interplay between them, appreciating the
contribution of hormone systems and neurotransmitters to immune health, and discovering the
multifaceted relationship between the health of your gut with its resident 70 trillion bacteria and your
own health. With Sarah’s focus on nutrient density, she advances the discussion from a diet that just
gives you a list of don’ts to one that also gives you lists of do’s and do more’s. With these guidelines,
you will learn not only to avoid those foods that may be contributing to your disease but also which
foods provide the nutrition your body needs to effectively heal.
      This book fills a void in the health and nutrition literature, not just with its focus on autoimmune
disease and general immune health, but also with its comprehensive approach. Sarah wasn’t satisfied
with simply explaining how diet affects immune health; she also emphasizes the importance of
lifestyle factors like how much sleep and activity you get, how well you manage your stress, and how
well you regulate a variety of hormones. Yes, it’s not all about what you put in your mouth, folks.
      The Paleo Approach not only explains what to change, but inspires and motivates you to get it
done. In this sense, The Paleo Approach is truly a guidebook, explaining the reasons why and giving
you practical strategies to implement diet and lifestyle changes to effect improvements in your health.
Through Sarah’s engaging and accessible explanations and her innovative yet pragmatic ideas, you
will finally see how all the pieces of the puzzle fit together to form a simple set of achievable
guidelines to improve your health.
     The Paleo Approach is the ultimate resource to empower patients looking for a natural yet
effective solution to their disease. Motivated purely by contemporary scientific studies, this book
bridges the gap between patients and their healthcare providers. Finally, diet and lifestyle
modifications will take center stage in patient treatment plans. And finally, autoimmune disease
sufferers have a viable long-term solution to manage and reverse their diseases.
     If you suffer from an autoimmune disease or other chronic illness or just want to understand how
what you eat and do impact the health of your gut, your hormones, and your immune system, then you
need this book. This book should be on your bookshelf, on your doctor’s bookshelf, and in every
waiting room.
A Message from Sarah

Dear Reader,
      You are about to embark on a nutritional roller-coaster ride. Some of the concepts in this book
may shake the very foundations of everything you thought you knew about health. But, as you will
quickly learn, every recommendation I make is steeped in science.
      I am a scientist by both training and nature. For me personally, knowing the reasons for things
helps me make good choices. While this applies broadly to every aspect of my life, it has been
particularly important for me throughout the process of healing of my body. There have been many
moments when I have felt frustrated or deprived, but understanding the why behind those feelings and
behind the choices I knew I needed to make enabled me to do the right thing for my health.
      I have always been passionate about scientific literacy. I believe that the general public has a far
greater capacity for understanding science than we are typically given credit for. Yes, that means you.
I believe that you can understand the complex science behind how diet and lifestyle affect your health
—even if you’ve never grown anything in a petri dish, even if you don’t know how many elements
there are in the periodic table (118!), and even if this is the first popular science book to grace your
bookshelf. So this book is as much about engaging you with the facts of health as it is about helping
you make choices that will allow your body to heal.
      While my focus is to help those with autoimmune diseases, the vast majority of the science in
this book can be applied to almost everyone. For example, I explain in great detail how plant proteins
in grains, such as gluten and wheat germ agglutinin, affect both the lining of the gut and the immune
system. These interactions occur in most of us, not just those with a genetic predisposition to
autoimmune diseases. And people afflicted with autoimmune diseases are not the only ones who feel
the consequences of how nutrient-dense their diets are, how much sleep they get, or how well they
manage stress. So even if you don’t have an autoimmune disease, I hope that reading this book will
give you a better understanding of the role that diet and lifestyle play in your entire well-being.
                                                                                   Thank you for reading.
                                                                           Wishing you the best of health,
                                                                                                    Sarah
Preface:
Putting the Puzzle Pieces Together

Autoimmune disease is an epidemic in our society. But it doesn’t have to be.
      Managing autoimmune disease is very much like solving a puzzle. Understanding what factors fit
together to cause autoimmune disease is the first step in being able to put all the right pieces together
to reverse it. What are those right pieces? As scientists learn more and more about the causes of
autoimmune disease, it is becoming increasingly obvious that genetics is only one piece of the puzzle.
In fact, the most current evidence points to autoimmune disease being just as tied to diet and lifestyle
factors as obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, with one difference: there are far
more puzzle pieces on the table with autoimmune disease. But don’t worry, because this book will
help you gather them all, understand how they interlock, and finally put them all together.
      My passion for understanding autoimmune disease stems from my own personal battles with it.
Yes, I too am part of the epidemic. I discovered that I had lichen planus in the spring of 2003. I had
had lesions for several months, but my doctor did not diagnose them properly, and it wasn’t until I
went to my childhood doctor while visiting my family that my disease was accurately diagnosed. As I
reflect on the health issues that I faced in the years leading up to that diagnosis, there were many,
many warning signs.
      As a substantially overweight teenager and young adult, I always thought that my principal health
problem was obesity. The simple fact that I was “fat” during those impressionable years seemed like
a far greater tragedy than any other health issues I might have had. But I did have other health issues—
many of them: gas, bloating, stomach cramps and chronic constipation attributed to irritable bowel
syndrome, migraines, anxiety attacks, mild depression, adult-onset asthma (severe), extensive
allergies (even some unusual ones, like a topical allergy to cardboard), gastroesophageal reflux
disease, mild gallbladder attacks, severe acne, fatigue, joint aches, tendonitis (an x-ray actually
showed early arthritis while the tendonitis was being diagnosed), carpal tunnel syndrome, frequent
lung and sinus infections, eczema, scalp psoriasis, and the aforementioned lichen planus. I also had
borderline high blood pressure, was prediabetic, and suffered from painful varicose veins. By my
late twenties, I was taking medication for acid reflux, gas, constipation, asthma, allergies, anxiety,
and migraines. I had prescriptions for topical steroids, inhaled steroids, intranasal steroids, and, on
more than one occasion, oral steroids. And all these medications came with unpleasant side effects.
      My first pregnancy was wrought with complications because of my weight and overall poor
health. (I did eventually lose weight—120 pounds—motivated by a desire to be healthier for the sake
of my children; you can read more about my personal weight-loss journey on my blog,
ThePaleoMom.com.) Many of my ailments improved when I switched to a low-carbohydrate diet to
manage my blood-sugar levels, and I had a much healthier second pregnancy. While some of the
puzzle pieces were falling into place, I still suffered from asthma and allergies (although more mild),
frequent migraines, minor anxiety, and all my digestive issues and skin conditions. In particular, in the
summer of 2011 when my younger daughter night-weaned, my lichen planus, which had been under
control for several years, flared.
      Out of frustration, I began scouring the Internet for information about the causes of lichen planus,
hoping to solve the puzzle of my own health. Although I didn’t know it at the time, I was finally
approaching the management of my disease from a functional-medicine perspective. I knew that
eczema was often linked to food sensitivities, which run in my family, and since I often had patches of
eczema in addition to the lichen planus lesions, I surmised that the two conditions might have a
common cause. What I discovered was that the link between food and inflammation goes far beyond
food sensitivities. I learned that some foods cause inflammation and imbalances in key hormones that
regulate the immune system; that some foods irritate the lining of the gut, interfere with digestion, and
deplete nutrients from the body; that my staple foods were nutritionally sparse; and that micronutrient
deficiencies were likely key players in all my ailments. I really began to make out the contours of the
puzzle when I learned that there is a direct link between gut health and skin health (and overall health
in general). This discovery led me to the Paleo diet.




      The Paleo diet is a whole-foods diet that includes only the most nutritionally dense and
sustainable foods. Using foods that were was readily available to our Paleolithic ancestors as a
starting point, a contemporary Paleo diet comprises what the most current, high-quality nutrition and
biomedical research suggests is the best way to eat for optimum health. As a result, you don’t have to
worry about eating foods that promote inflammation, cause hormone imbalances, and have been
conclusively linked to chronic disease. Specifically, a Paleo diet is composed of quality meats, fish,
eggs, vegetables, fruits, nuts, and seeds.
      Adopting a Paleo diet greatly improved my health. I no longer suffered from irritable bowel
syndrome, migraines, anxiety, asthma, and eczema. I no longer had sinus infections. Lung infections no
longer meant that I needed a course of steroids. I lost more weight, slept better, and was happier. But
I was still missing pieces to the puzzle, and I had to go beyond the standard Paleo diet to truly manage
my lichen planus. It was around this time that I learned that lichen planus is actually an autoimmune
disease. Yes, six different doctors in five different cities over eight years, and not one had mentioned
that my disease was autoimmune in nature.
      Within the Paleo diet framework is a modification known as the autoimmune protocol (originally
called the autoimmune caveat by Robb Wolf in The Paleo Solution). As I struggled with the
implementation of this more restricted diet, I delved into the science behind it. I learned why certain
foods seemed to aggravate my disease, which foods helped my body heal, and the importance of other
lifestyle factors, such as getting enough sleep, managing stress, and spending time outdoors. This is
what I call the Paleo Approach: it’s a comprehensive set of recommendations that address the root
causes of autoimmune disease. It puts all the pieces of the puzzle together.
     Adopting the Paleo Approach has meant that I no longer require treatment for my autoimmune
diseases or any other ailment. I do not require any medications and successfully manage my diseases
using only diet and lifestyle. Not only has the Paleo Approach worked amazingly well for me, but
thousands of others report similar successes. (You will find testimonials throughout this book and
here.) A version of this protocol is even being used in clinical trials to reverse multiple sclerosis.


What Will You Gain from the Paleo Approach?


The goal of this book is to help you realize just how important diet and lifestyle are in the
management of your disease. I will walk you through the scientific rationale not only for dietary
changes but also for lifestyle priorities that together will promote healing, reduce inflammation, and
regulate your immune system. Beyond an understanding of what to do and why, I will also provide
concrete strategies and resources for implementing these recommendations and help you overcome
the common obstacles to making these changes.
      Part 1 focuses on the pieces of the puzzle that contribute to autoimmune disease—the causes.
Chapter 1 starts with a primer on how the immune system works and what goes wrong in autoimmune
disease; then explains the role of genetics and environmental triggers such as infections, toxins, and
hormones in autoimmune disease; and introduces some key concepts linking diet and lifestyle with the
risk of autoimmune disease. In chapter 2, I explain how our sugar- and gluten-laden, highly processed
and engineered, high-omega-6 fatty acid Western diets are contributing to the rise in autoimmune
disease—this is where you will learn what not to eat. Specifically, I explain why nutrient density is
so important and may be the biggest part of solving the autoimmune disease puzzle. I also walk you
through the details of how specific foods interact with your body (your gut barrier, your hormones,
and your immune system) and how these foods, which are often erroneously marketed as healthy,
contribute to the development and progression of autoimmune disease. In chapter 3, you will learn
that diet doesn’t exist in a vacuum and that lifestyle factors are equally important in managing
autoimmune disease. Specifically, you will learn how chronic stress, inadequate sleep, and a
sedentary lifestyle predispose you not just to autoimmune disease but to chronic illness in general.
Chapter 4 explains the foundation of the Paleo Approach, provides strategies for working with your
doctor to make the necessary changes, and gets you ready to dive into part 2.
      In part 2, we get to focus on the positive—the cure. I know that following a restricted diet and
giving up some of your favorite foods is not easy. And I know that changing your schedule to reflect
new lifestyle priorities requires effort and perseverance. Because of my personal experience with
both autoimmune disease and this protocol, I know how important it is not just to lay out the scientific
rationale for making these changes, but also to give you tips on how to actually make it work for you!
Chapter 5 details exactly what foods to eat with tips for the day-to-day, nitty-gritty of putting this
protocol into action, including complete foods lists, where to source quality foods, recommendations
for tight budgets, and FAQs. Chapter 6 is jam-packed with strategies for prioritizing lifestyle factors
that promote healing and proper regulation of your hormones and your immune system, including
simple strategies to reduce stress, prioritize sleep, and increase physical activity. The goal is to give
your body the opportunity to heal and the nutritional resources to do so. Chapters 7 and 8 cover how
to transition to and implement these dietary changes, what to expect, working with your doctor,
supplements, and troubleshooting. Chapter 9 walks you through how to reintroduce banished foods
once your disease is in remission and provides some strategies for the long haul.
      Keep in mind that the earlier you adopt these recommendations, the more likely you are to
completely reverse your disease. If autoimmune disease runs in your family or you experience
symptoms that indicate that you might be in the early stages of an autoimmune disease, now is the time
to act. Improving your diet now will save you from much hardship later on. I hope that you will give
this protocol a sincere try for two or three months so that you can experience the enormous
improvement most people do when they commit to it. At worst, you will have given some of your
favorite foods and late-night TV a rest. At best, you will have discovered a new vitality, an effective
strategy to manage and reverse your disease, and hope for the future. You will have solved the puzzle.
Acknowledgments

In early November 2011, I turned to my husband, David, and said “What do you think of my starting a
blog?” He was very supportive (I literally launched ThePaleoMom.com three days later) and has not
wavered in his support since. When, ten short months later, I was given the opportunity to write this
book, David was wholeheartedly on board. This book would not exist without his unconditional love,
emotional support, and cheerleading throughout the process. Likewise, this book would not exist
without my girls, who provide so much inspiration for me, both personally and professionally.
      It truly does take a village to raise kids, but this has never been truer for my family than during
the past year while I worked on this book. This book simply would not have been possible without
the many supportive and nurturing people in my children’s lives who filled the void created by my
focus on this project. In particular, I am grateful to David for doing double duty, the Goldberg family
for so many quiet Sundays, the England family, our fantastic neighbors the Cochrans and the Kipps,
Rachael Blaske, Kelly Posada, the East Cobb YMCA, Mrs. Duffy, Mrs. Hamiter for starting my older
daughter’s education off on the right foot, Mrs. Adams, my mom, my awesome mother-in-law, and
Aunt Cheryl and Uncle Sandy—yes, Skype calls to entertain the girls while I cooked or wrote count
(and it was even better when we visited)!
      My mother has been one of the most positive and influential forces in my life. I would not be
who I am without her. Beyond emotional support, watching the girls so I could write and edit, and the
intellectual contributions of “Hey Mom, I need a better word for…,” Mom is the reason writing and
illustrating a book like this is in my skill set.
      I thank the researchers who trained me through my doctorate and postdoctoral fellowships, in
particular Jean Wilson, PhD, who supported my efforts to find balance between my scientific career
and my parenting priorities.
      My journey into the Paleo sphere, from amateur blogger to author and expert, was guided by
some pretty wonderful people. Thanks to Chad Hogan for introducing me to the words lectin and
Cordain; to Jimmy Moore for “discovering me”; to my partners in podcast, Stacy Toth and Matt
McCarry, for realizing what I could be before I did and providing so much friendship, advice, and
companionship throughout this journey; and to Diane Sanfilippo for so much support and advice. I
would also like to thank the other leaders in the ancestral health movement who tackle these topics
from a scientific perspective and whose research is often a launching point for me: Loren Cordain,
Robb Wolf, Terry Wahls, Chris Kresser, Mark Sisson, Chris Masterjohn, Stephen Guyenet, Paul
Jaminet, and others.
      It seems unfair that only my name gets to be on the cover of this book. Writing a book takes so
much more than just the author’s research and ideas and time to type away. I can’t possibly begin to
emphasize how essential Erich Krauss, Michele Farrington, and all the amazing and talented people
at Victory Belt Publishing were to the creation of this book. My grandfather’s lifelong friend credited
his success as a writer to his editor. I am similarly grateful. There was research support by Tamar
England, Alison Dungey, and Laura Davis, MD, who also answered some of my clinical questions.
And I thank Angie Alt, Mickey Trescott, Christina Lynn Feindel, and Melissa Hughes (aka Team
Paleo Mom) for handling the huge volume of questions e-mailed to me daily so that I could focus on
this book. A big thank-you also goes to Rob Foster of robfosterstudio.weebly.com and Jason Perez of
sadbacon.com for their illustration contributions, and to Dawn Brewer for being such a brilliant
photographer.
     Finally, I want to acknowledge the tremendous support and enthusiasm from so many devoted
blog readers and podcast listeners. Connecting with you through social media, the blog, e-mail, and
the podcast has been an amazing and rewarding experience. Many of your questions have guided the
topics discussed in this book. And helping you is what has motivated me through this last year of
writing.
Introduction: The Epidemic of Autoimmune Disease

There are more than one hundred confirmed autoimmune diseases and many more diseases that are
suspected of having autoimmune origins. Symptoms vary considerably, from the debilitating back pain
of ankylosing spondylitis to the loss of control over the body in multiple sclerosis to the itchy, red,
flaky skin of psoriasis. However, the root cause of all autoimmune diseases is the same: our immune
system, which is supposed to protect us from invading microorganisms, turns against us and attacks
our cells instead. Which cells or proteins are attacked determines the autoimmune disease and its
symptoms.
      The vast majority of autoimmune diseases are chronic. Chronic illness is the leading cause of
death and disability in the United States, and autoimmune diseases may account for as much as half of
all chronic diseases suffered by Americans today. The American Autoimmune Related Diseases
Association (AARDA) estimates that50 million Americans suffer from at least one autoimmune
disease. In comparison, 12 million Americans suffer from cancer and 25 million from heart disease.
These numbers are not only staggering in their own right, but the prevalence of autoimmune disease
is increasing.
J. F. Bach, “The Effect of Infections on Susceptibility to Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases,”New England Journal of Medicine 347
(Sep 19, 2002): 911–920. Copyright © 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical
Society.

     People who suffer from one or more autoimmune diseases often feel helpless, slaves to their
disease(s), and powerless to improve their health. This doesn’t have to be the case. Although it has
not been widely recognized, autoimmune disease is directly linked to diet and lifestyle, just as
cardiovascular disease, obesity, and type 2 diabetes are. While it is more complicated in origin than
these other conditions (which we’ll get to in chapter 2), changes in diet and lifestyle can have
powerfully beneficial effects on autoimmune disease: you can even completely reverse your disease!
     Autoimmune disease is still greatly underdiagnosed, and the true number of people afflicted
remains unknown: it is estimated, for example, that celiac disease has been diagnosed in only 5
percent of those who actually suffer from it. Autoimmune diseases run in families, with women being
more than three times as likely to develop one as men. Once you have developed an autoimmune
disease, you are at much greater risk of developing additional autoimmune diseases. Currently, there
are no reliable methods to screen people to determine if they are at greater risk of developing an
autoimmune disease or to accurately identify when a person is in the early stages of autoimmunity.

          “I have learned to hate all traitors, and there is no disease that I spit on more than
          treachery.”
          —AESCHYLUS




How Many People Suffer from Autoimmune Diseases?




The National Institutes of Health used epidemiological studies pertaining to only twenty-four of the
hundred-plus autoimmune diseases to estimate that 23.5 million Americans have an autoimmune
disease.
     The American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association (AARDA) estimates that autoimmune
disease has been diagnosed in 50 million Americans. AARDA used epidemiological studies,
combined with individual patient group data, to show that approximately 20 percent of Americans are
affected by autoimmune disease—that’s about 63 million people!
     Whether the true number of Americans who have an autoimmune disease is 23.5 million or 63
million, it’s still way too many of us.



     Autoimmune disease can be challenging to diagnose because it often presents as a collection of
vague symptoms (such as fatigue, headaches, and muscle or joint aches). Too often these symptoms
are dismissed as signs of getting insufficient sleep, working too hard, stress, being over- or
underweight, or age. In fact, a survey performed by AARDA showed that the majority of patients later
found to have serious autoimmune conditions had a difficult time obtaining a diagnosis: 45 percent of
them were labeled hypochondriacs in the earliest stages of their illnesses. As challenging as it is to
diagnose, autoimmune disease is even harder to treat.
     The medical establishment offers no cure for autoimmune diseases. Treatment, or management,
varies with the disease. Generally, hormone replacement is the protocol for diseases that result in a
hormone deficiency (as in the case of hypothyroidism or type 1 diabetes). Corticosteroids are often
used to suppress the immune system, generally with many unwanted side effects. Stronger
immunosuppressant drugs (including disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, or DMARDs) are
available for very ill patients but come with greater risks, especially for long-term use, such as
increased susceptibility to infection and risk of developing cancer. Pain medication is also
prescribed when appropriate. Although typical treatment does not currently include diet and lifestyle
modifications, the evidence is accumulating for their inclusion. In fact, many people can manage and
even reverse their autoimmune diseases just by making changes in diet and lifestyle.
     In essence, autoimmune disease is caused by a betrayal of the immune system. Medical
researchers still don’t completely understand why or how people develop autoimmune disease, but
what is known points to three key factors:
                    Genetic susceptibility
                    Infection, environmental triggers, or bad luck
                    Diet and lifestyle




      We are very limited in terms of what we can do to address either of the first two factors.
However, we have enormous control over what we eat and how we live. As you will see, diet and
lifestyle factors (such as sleep, physical activity, and stress management) are intricately intertwined
with the development of autoimmune disease. Even more important, diet and lifestyle are intricately
intertwined with the body’s ability to heal. This is critical, because it means that autoimmune disease
can be alleviated through diet and approach to life. I want you to understand that there is hope for
those with autoimmune disease. This diagnosis does not automatically sentence you to a life of pain,
fatigue, and handfuls of prescription drugs. With the diet and lifestyle recommendations outlined in
this book, you can halt the progression of your disease and even put your disease into complete
remission. You can regain your life.
The Cost of Autoimmune Disease




The National Institutes of Health conservatively estimates the annual health care costs of autoimmune
disease to be $100 billion.
      The true cost of autoimmune disease is probably much, much higher. The annual direct health
care costs of just seven of the hundred-plus known autoimmune diseases (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative
colitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and
scleroderma) are estimated to total $70 billion annually.
      Despite the prevalence of autoimmune disease, research in the field is embarrassingly
underfunded. AARDA evaluated National Institutes of Health research funding in 2003 and found that
less than $600 million was spent on autoimmune diseases that year, compared with more than ten
times that amount spent on cancer.




Do You Suffer from an Autoimmune Disease?


Many people are never told by their physicians that the conditions with which they are diagnosed
have an autoimmune origin. Or they are told that their disease is autoimmune-related but aren’t told
what that actually means. I speak from personal experience. I was given a diagnosis of lichen planus
in early 2003. I saw six different doctors in five different cities over the next eight years. Not one
mentioned that my disease was autoimmune in nature, and not one recommended any diet or lifestyle
change that might help. I was never prescribed any treatment other than strong topical and low-dose
oral steroids. I had to figure it out on my own.
      The complete list of the diseases that are either confirmed autoimmune diseases or for which
there is very strong evidence for autoimmune origins is staggering (see here). If you are like me, you
may be surprised to see some fairly common conditions, like rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis, on
this list. You might also be wondering what else you don’t know about your disease, such as root
causes and what simple changes you can make to reverse its course.
      There are also many diseases that are suspected, but not yet confirmed, to have autoimmune
origins or be otherwise linked to autoimmunity. It is nearly impossible to assemble a complete list of
suspected autoimmune diseases, but some of note are:
     Alzheimer’s disease
     Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; aka Lou Gehrig’s disease)
     Chronic fatigue syndrome
     Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
     Dementia
     Dercum’s disease (aka Adiposis dolorosa)
     Epilepsy
     Fibromyalgia
     Hidradenitis suppurativa
     Morphea
     Neuromyotonia
     Opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome
     Parkinson’s disease
     Progressive inflammatory neuropathy
     Schizophrenia
     Some forms of cancer



How Is Autoimmune Disease Diagnosed?




                                         Illustration by Jason Perez

Because it is not yet considered a group of diseases, there are no physicians who specialize in
autoimmune disease. Instead, patients must seek specialists depending on the organ(s) or system(s)
affected.
      As a general rule, autoimmune disease is difficult to diagnose. Many people struggle with
symptoms, going from specialist to specialist and enduring test after test, to no avail—at least until
the disease has progressed to the point at which the symptoms are severe, predictable, and fit into a
pattern consistent with a specific autoimmune disease. Unfortunately, there is no single test that can
definitively determine whether you have an autoimmune disease. Rather, doctors must piece together
clues from medical histories, symptoms, physical exams, laboratory tests (most commonly blood
tests), radiography results, and biopsies.
      Blood tests to diagnose an autoimmune disorder may include analysis of:
     Antinuclear antibodies
     Autoantibodies
     CBC (complete blood count) and/or CBC with differential
     C-reactive protein (CRP)
     Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; aka sed rate)
     Food sensitivities/allergies
     Hormone levels
     Micronutrient deficiency
     Organ function
     Secretory IgA antibodies




Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD). ASD may one day be added to the adjacent list of suspected
autoimmune diseases. We don’t know, but studies of ASD children have shown an increased
association with maternal celiac disease and rheumatoid arthritis as well as with a family history of
type 1 diabetes. This may reflect a common genetic risk factor or changes in the fetal environment in
the cases of mothers with diagnosed autoimmune disease.




Are You at Risk for Autoimmunity?


There is no way to predict whether you will develop an autoimmune disease, although having family
members with autoimmune diseases increases your odds of developing one yourself. If you do get
one, it’s often not the same disease a family member has. Studies measuring the percentage of healthy
individuals who have autoantibodies (antibodies that can attack their own cells) in their blood show
that a staggering 20–30 percent of healthy people are potentially already in the very early stages of
autoimmune disease (although the development of autoimmune disease requires more than just the
formation of autoantibodies).
      Early signs of autoimmune disease can be especially difficult to attribute to a specific condition.
Other than experiencing the “minor” complaints listed below, people may remain symptom-free for
years or even decades. Any of these symptoms can be associated with the early stages of autoimmune
disease:


     Allergies
     Anxiety and depression
     Blood pressure changes (usually low)
     Digestive problems
     Extreme fatigue
     Gallbladder disease
     Low blood sugar
     Malaise (generally feeling unwell)
     Memory problems
     Migraines
     Muscle or joint pain
     Muscle weakness
     PMS
     Rashes and other skin problems
     Recurrent headaches
     Resistance to weight loss
     Sleep disturbances
     Susceptibility to infections
     Swollen glands
     Thyroid problems
     Unexplained weight changes
     Yeast infections


     If you have any of these symptoms, don’t panic—it doesn’t necessarily mean that you will
develop autoimmune disease. (There may be other causes of these symptoms.) However, if you are
suffering from any of these symptoms, you don’t have to put up with the discomfort. All these
symptoms can be alleviated with the diet and lifestyle changes in The Paleo Approach. Most
important, you have an opportunity—the opportunity to prevent autoimmune disease from
developing!
     It is also worth mentioning that several ailments are known to occur very frequently in
conjunction with autoimmune disorders. They are:


     Cholangitis
     Chronic fatigue syndrome
     Eczema
     Fibromyalgia
     Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS); this occurs frequently in conjunction with autoimmune
     thyroid diseases


      These are not autoimmune diseases themselves (or at least have not been confirmed as such), but
because of their association with autoimmune disease, they may indicate that an autoimmune disease
is present. If you suffer from one of these conditions, it is a sign that it’s time to make diet and
lifestyle changes to keep autoimmunity at bay.
The Spectrum of Autoimmune Diseases
The following is a list of diseases that are either confirmed autoimmune diseases or for which
there is very strong scientific evidence for autoimmune origins:
A
Acute brachial neuropathy (also known as acute
brachial radiculitis, neuralgic amyotrophy,
brachial neuritis, brachial plexus neuropathy, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
brachial   plexitis,   and     Parsonage-Turner
syndrome)
                                                Acute parapsoriasis (also known as acute guttate
                                                parapsoriasis, acute pityriasis lichenoides,
Acute necrotizing hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis parapsoriasis varioliformis, Mucha-Habermann
                                                disease, and parapsoriasis or pityriasis
                                                lichenoides et varioliformis acuta)
Addison’s disease (also known as chronic
                                                Adult linear IgA disease (also known as linear IgA
adrenal insufficiency, hypocortisolism, and
                                                disease)
hypoadrenalism)
                                                Allergic granulomatosis (also known as Churg-
Agammaglobulinemia
                                                Strauss syndrome)
Alopecia areata (AA; also known as spot American trypanosomiasis (also known as Chagas
baldness)                                       disease)
                                                Anaphylactoid purpura (also known as purpura
Amyloidosis
                                                rheumatica and Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia (also
                                                Ankylosing spondylitis (AS; also known as
known as Castleman’s disease, giant lymph node
                                                Bekhterev’s disease and Marie-Strümpell disease)
hyperplasia, and lymphoid hamartoma)
                                                Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS or APLS; also
Anti-GBM or anti-TBM nephritis
                                                known as Hughes syndrome)
Aplastic anemia (also known as autoimmune Arthritis psoriatica (also known as arthropathic
aplastic anemia)                                psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis)
Arthropathic psoriasis (also known as arthritis Atrophic polychondritis (also known as systemic
psoriatica and psoriatic arthritis)             chondromalacia and relapsing polychondritis)
                                                Autoimmune aplastic anemia (also known as
Autoimmune angioedema
                                                aplastic anemia)
Autoimmune cardiomyopathy                       Autoimmune dysautonomia
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia                     Autoimmune hepatitis
Autoimmune hyperlipidemia                       Autoimmune immunodeficiency
Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED)             Autoimmune myocarditis
                                                Autoimmune peripheral neuropathy (also known as
Autoimmune pancreatitis
                                                peripheral neuropathy)
                                                Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, Types 1, 2,
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS)
                                                and 3
Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis              Autoimmune retinopathy
Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura (ATP;
also known as thrombotic thrombocytopenic
                                                Autoimmune thyroid disease
purpura and idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura)
Autoimmune urticaria                            Autoimmune uveitis (also known as uveitis)
Axonal and neuronal neuropathies
B
Balo disease (also known as Balo concentric Behçet’s disease (also known as Silk Road
sclerosis)                                       disease)
                                                 Benign mucosal pemphigoid (also known as
Bekhterev’s disease (also known as ankylosing cicatricial pemphigoid, benign mucous membrane
spondylitis and Marie-Strümpell disease)         pemphigoid, scarring pemphigoid, and ocular
                                                 cicatricial pemphigoid)
Berger’s disease (also known as IgA Besnier-Boeck disease (also known as
nephropathy          and          synpharyngitic sarcoidosis)
glomerulonephritis)
                                                 Bladder pain syndrome (also known as interstitial
Bickerstaff’s encephalitis
                                                 cystitis)
Brachial neuritis (also known as brachial plexus
neuropathy, brachial plexitis, Parsonage-Turner
                                                 Bullous pemphigoid
syndrome, acute brachial neuropathy, acute
brachial radiculitis, and neuralgic amyotrophy)
C
Castleman’s disease (also known as giant lymph
                                                    Celiac disease (also known as coeliac disease and
node hyperplasia, lymphoid hamartoma, and
                                                    celiac sprue)
angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia)
Chagas disease (also known as American
                                                    Chorea minor (also known as Sydenham’s chorea)
trypanosomiasis)
Chronic adrenal insufficiency (also known as
                                                    Chronic focal encephalitis (CFE; also known as
hypocortisolism, hypoadrenalism, and Addison’s
                                                    Rasmussen’s encephalitis)
disease)
Chronic          inflammatory         demyelinating Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (also known as
polyneuropathy (CIDP)                               Hashimoto’s thyroiditis)
Chronic recurrent multifocal ostomyelitis Chronic urticaria as a manifestation of venulitis
(CRMO)                                              (also known as urticarial vasculitis)
Churg-Strauss syndrome (also known as allergic Cicatricial pemphigoid (also known as benign
granulomatosis)                                     mucosal pemphigoid)
Cogan’s syndrome                                    Cold agglutinin disease
Congenital heart block                              Coxsackie viral myocarditis
Cranial arteritis (also known as Horton disease, CREST syndrome (also known as limited systemic
giant cell arteritis, and temporal arteritis)       sclerosis or scleroderma)
                                                    Crow-Fukase syndrome (also known as Takatsuki
Crohn’s disease
                                                    disease, PEP syndrome, and POEMS syndrome)
Cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis (CFA; also
known as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and
fibrosing alveolitis)
D
Demyelinating neuropathies (also known as
                                                Dermatomyositis (DM)
idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating diseases)
Devic’s disease (also known as neuromyelitis Diabetes mellitus type 1 (also known as insulin-
optica)                                         dependent diabetes and type 1 diabetes)
                                                Dressler’s    syndrome      (also    known as
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
                                                postmyocardial infarction syndrome)
Duhring’s disease (also known as dermatitis
herpetiformis)
Endocarditis lenta (also known as subacute
E
                                              Endometriosis
bacterial endocarditis)
Eosinophilic esophagitis or gastroenteritis   Eosinophilic fasciitis
                                              Erythroblastopenia (also known as pure red cell
Erythema nodosum
                                              aplasia)
Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia              Evans syndrome
Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE)
F
Fibrosingalveolitis (also known as idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis and cryptogenic fibrosing
alveolitis)
G
Gestational pemphigoid (also known as herpes Giant cell arteritis (also known as temporal
gestationis)                                   arteritis, cranial arteritis, and Horton disease)
Giant lymph node hyperplasia (also known as
lymphoid hamartoma, angiofollicular lymph node Glomerulonephritis
hyperplasia, and Castleman’s disease)
                                               Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA; also
Goodpasture’s syndrome
                                               known as Wegener’s granulomatosis)
                                               Guillain-Barré syndrome (also known as Landry’s
Graves’ disease
                                               paralysis and Miller Fisher syndrome)
H
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (also known as chronic
                                                      Hashimoto’s encephalitis or encephalopathy
lymphocytic thyroiditis)
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (also known as Herpes gestationis (also known as gestational
anaphylactoid purpura and purpura rheumatica) pemphigoid)
Horton disease (also known as giant cell Hughes syndrome (also known as antiphospholipid
arteritis, temporal arteritis, and cranial arteritis) syndrome)
Hypocortisolism (also known as hypoadrenalism,
Addison’s disease, and chronic adrenal Hypogammaglobulinemia
insufficiency)
I
Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (includes Idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating diseases
both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis)      (also known as demyelinating neuropathies)
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF; also knownIdiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP; also
as cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis and fibrosing known as thrombocytopenic purpura and
alveolitis)                                       autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura)
IgA nephropathy (also known as synpharyngitic
                                                  IgG4-related sclerosing disease
glomerulonephritis and Berger’s disease)
Inclusion body myositis                             Insulin-dependent diabetes (also known as type 1
                                                    diabetes and diabetes mellitus type 1)
Interstitial cystitis (also known as bladder pain
syndrome)
J
Juvenile diabetes (also known as diabetes
                                                 Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (also known as
mellitus type 1, insulin-dependent diabetes, and
                                                 juvenile idiopathic arthritis and Still’s disease)
type 1 diabetes)
K
Kawasaki syndrome (also known as Kawasaki
                                          Kussmaul-Maier disease                 (also   known    as
disease,  lymph     node    syndrome, and
                                          polyarteritis nodosa)
mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome)
L
Lambert-Eaton syndrome (also known as Landry’s paralysis (also known as Miller Fisher
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome)        syndrome and Guillain-Barré syndrome)
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis               Lichen planus
Lichen sclerosus                          Ligneous conjunctivitis
Limited systemic sclerosis (also known as
                                          Linear IgA disease (LAD; also known as adult
limited systemic scleroderma and CREST
                                          linear IgA disease)
syndrome)
Lupus (also known as systemic lupus
                                          Lyme disease, chronic
erythematosus)
                                          Lymphoid      hamartoma    (also   known    as
Lymph node syndrome (also known as
                                          angiofollicular     lymph   node   hyperplasia,
mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome and
                                          Castleman’s disease, and giant lymph node
Kawasaki disease)
                                          hyperplasia)
M
Marchiafava-Micheli syndrome (also known as Marie-Strümpell disease (also known as
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria)              ankylosing spondylitis and Bekhterev’s disease)
                                                  Microscopic polyangiitis (also known as
Ménière’s disease
                                                  microscopic polyarteritis)
Miller Fisher syndrome (also known as Guillain- Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD; also
Barré syndrome and Landry’s paralysis)            known as Sharp’s syndrome)
Moersch-Woltman condition (also known as stiff
                                                  Mooren’s ulcer
person syndrome)
Mucha-Habermann disease (also known as acute
guttate parapsoriasis, acute parapsoriasis, acute Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (also known
pityriasis lichenoides, and parapsoriasis or as lymph node syndrome and Kawasaki disease)
pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta)
Multiple sclerosis                                Myasthenia gravis
Myositis
N
                                                 Neuromyelitis optica (also known as Devic’s
Narcolepsy
                                                 disease)
Neutropenia
O
Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid (also known as
benign mucous membrane pemphigoid and Optic neuritis
scarring pemphigoid)
                                             Ormond’s disease (also known as retroperitoneal
Ord’s thyroiditis
                                             fibrosis)
P
Palindromic rheumatism                              Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration
Parapsoriasis varioliformis (also known as
Mucha-Habermann disease            acute    guttate
                                                    Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH; also
parapsoriasis, acute parapsoriasis, acute
                                                    known as Marchiafava-Micheli syndrome)
pityriasis lichenoides, parapsoriasis or pityriasis
lichenoides et varioliformis acuta)
Parry-Romberg syndrome (also known as
                                                    Pars planitis (also known as peripheral uveitis)
progressive hemifacial atrophy)
Parsonage-Turner syndrome (also known as
acute brachial neuropathy, acute brachial
                                                    Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders
radiculitis, neuralgic amyotrophy, brachial
                                                    associated with streptococcus (PANDAS)
neuritis, brachial plexus neuropathy, and brachial
plexitis)
                                                    PEP syndrome (also known as POEMS syndrome,
Pemphigus vulgaris
                                                    Crow-Fukase syndrome, and Takatsuki disease)
Peripheral neuropathy (also known as
                                                    Perivenous encephalomyelitis
autoimmune peripheral neuropathy)
                                                    POEMS syndrome (also known as Crow-Fukase
Pernicious anemia
                                                    syndrome, Takatsuki disease, and PEP syndrome)
Polyarteritis nodosa (also known as Kussmaul-
                                                    Polymyalgia rheumatica
Maier disease)
                                                    Postmyocardial infarction syndrome (also known
Polymyositis (PM)
                                                    as Dressler’s syndrome)
Postpericardiotomy syndrome                         Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)
                                                    Progressive hemifacial atrophy (also known as
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
                                                    Parry Romberg syndrome)
                                                    Psoriatic arthritis (also known as arthritis
Psoriasis                                           psoriatica and arthropathic psoriasis)
Pure red cell aplasia        (also   known    as Purpura rheumatic (also known as Henoch-
erythroblastopenia)                              Schönlein purpura and anaphylactoid purpura)
Pyoderma gangrenosum
R
Rasmussen’s encephalitis (also known as chronic
                                                Raynaud’s phenomenon, disease, or syndrome
focal encephalitis)
Reactive arthritis (also known as Reiter’s
                                                Reflex sympathetic dystrophy
syndrome)
Reiter’s syndrome (also known as reactive Relapsing polychondritis (also known as atrophic
arthritis)                                      polychondritis and systemic chondromalacia)
Restless legs syndrome (also known as Willis- Retinocochleocerebral vasculopathy (also known
Ekbom disease)                                  as Susac’s syndrome)
Retroperitoneal fibrosis (also known as
                                                Rheumatic fever
Ormond’s disease)
Rheumatoid arthritis
S
                                              Scarring pemphigoid (also known as ocular
Sarcoidosis (also known as Besnier-Boeck
                                              cicatricial pemphigoid and benign mucous
disease)
                                              membrane pemphigoid)
Schmidt’s syndrome (also known as autoimmune
                                              Schnitzler syndrome
polyendocrine syndrome type 2)
Scleritis                                     Scleroderma
Sharp’s syndrome (also known as mixed Sicca syndrome (also known as Sjögren’s
connective tissue disease)                    syndrome)
Silk Road disease (also known as Behçet’s Sjögren’s syndrome (also known as Sicca
disease)                                      syndrome)
Sperm and testicular autoimmunity             Spot baldness (also known as alopecia areata)
Stiff person syndrome (also known as Moersch- Still’s disease (also known as juvenile rheumatoid
Woltman condition)                            arthritis and juvenile idiopathic arthritis)
Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE; alsoSusac’s           syndrome      (also      known       as
known as endocarditis lenta)                  retinocochleocerebral vasculopathy)
Sydenham’s chorea (also known as chorea
                                              Sympathetic ophthalmia (SO)
minor)
                                              Systemic chondromalacia (also known as
Synpharyngitic glomerulonephritis (also known
                                              relapsing       polychondritis      and      atrophic
as Berger’s disease and IgA nephropathy)
                                              polychondritis)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; also known
as lupus)
T
Takatsuki disease (also known as PEP syndrome,
                                                 Takayasu’s arteritis or disease
POEMS syndrome, and Crow-Fukase syndrome)
                                                  Thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP; also known as
Temporal arteritis (also known as giant cell
                                                  idiopathic   thrombocytopenic   purpura and
arteritis, cranial arteritis, and Horton disease)
                                                  autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura)
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome                              Transverse myelitis
Type I diabetes (also known as diabetes mellitus Types 1, 2, and 3 autoimmune polyglandular
type 1 and insulin-dependent diabetes)            syndrome
U
                                                    Undifferentiated   connective   tissue   disease
Ulcerative colitis
                                                    (UCTD)
Urticarial vasculitis (also known as chronic
                                             Uveitis (also known as autoimmune uveitis)
urticaria as a manifestation of venulitis)
V
Vasculitis                                          Vesiculobullous dermatosis
Vitiligo
W
Wegener’s granulomatosis (also known as Willis-Ekbom disease (also known as restless leg
granulomatosis with polyangiitis)       syndrome)

If Autoimmune Disease Is Epidemic, Why Aren’t There More
Resources for Patients?




                                        Illustration by Jason Perez

A variety of factors contribute to the gulf between the sheer number of people affected by autoimmune
disease and public awareness of it. Because there are no drugs that are effective at broadly treating
autoimmune disease, pharmaceutical companies, generally a source of information about diseases,
have no interest in generating information about autoimmune disease. And governments around the
world—another source of information about health—still support nutritional guidelines that are
already twenty years out of sync with biological, medical, and nutrition research. Awareness might
have to wait awhile.
     Another reason that autoimmune disease is below most people’s radar is that it is not actually
considered a class of diseases (the way cancer, for example, encompasses a variety of diseases or the
w a y cardiovascular disease can refer to a variety of conditions). This is why there are no
autoimmune disease specialists. Instead, you have to find a doctor whose expertise is the organ or
system that is affected by your disease. So, although all these diseases have the same root cause, if
you have arthritis, you see a rheumatologist; if you have hypothyroidism, you see an endocrinologist;
if you have celiac disease, you see a gastroenterologist; and if you have psoriasis, you see a
dermatologist.
      Just as there are no physicians who specialize in autoimmune disease, autoimmune disease
research is typically approached from the context of one specific autoimmune disease. There are very
few research labs that focus on the commonalities between autoimmune diseases in the effort to
identify a root cause. Epidemiological studies thus far have focused only on individual autoimmune
diseases. But this is starting to change. As researchers garner a more in-depth understanding of the
root causes of autoimmune disease, and as this information percolates through the medical field and
public knowledge, more and more people will learn what autoimmune diseases are and whether or
not they have one.




Is the Paleo Approach Right for You?
Thousands of people have already benefited from the Paleo Approach. And you can, too. If you have
been told that you have any of the diseases mentioned here, then the Paleo Approach is definitely for
you. The diet and lifestyle recommendations in this book are designed to reduce inflammation,
support normal functioning of the immune system, and promote healing. Depending on your specific
diagnosis, you can expect benefits to range from halting the progression of your disease to
dramatically reducing your symptoms to putting your disease into complete remission—without the
use of drugs.
      Implementing the Paleo Approach is also a good idea for people who believe they may be in the
early stages of autoimmune disease or who are at risk of developing an autoimmune disease. But this
book isn’t just for those with autoimmune disease—it’s for anyone interested in optimizing health. For
this diet is composed of only incredibly nutrient-dense, anti-inflammatory foods—those rich in every
macronutrient and micronutrient that the body needs to thrive.
      Those with illnesses that aren’t autoimmune-related will also see great benefits from adopting
this type of diet: it can appreciably reduce cardiovascular risk factors; manage type 2 diabetes; and
improve asthma, allergies, and other immune- (but not autoimmune-) related health issues. It is
important to mention that the Paleo diet, which forms the basic framework for the Paleo Approach, is
an outstanding protocol for preventing chronic illness in those without autoimmune disease or
autoimmune-disease risk factors.
      As a new understanding of the root causes of autoimmune disease is beginning to emerge, the
importance of diet and lifestyle factors is coming to the fore. This book is the first complete guide to
managing autoimmune disease through diet and lifestyle. It is the book I wish my doctor had offered
me ten years ago when I was first given a diagnosis of autoimmune disease. It is the book I wish I had
found as a teenager when I first started experiencing the early signs of autoimmunity. I hope that this
book will change your approach to managing your disease and will help you look ahead to your future
with optimism.
      So, are you ready to get started?

Testimonial by Christina Lynn Feindel




“I was twelve years old when I started having joint pain, migraines, chest pain, indigestion, manic
depression, insomnia, and neuropathy. I was poked and prodded every couple of months, but none
of the fourteen doctors I ended up seeing could figure out what was wrong with me. When their
collective opinion was that I was making it all up, I figured that maybe I’d grow out of it someday.
But I never did. By the time I was twenty-two, my migraines were so bad that I couldn’t go to work.
I spent most of my days wishing I’d just die already. According to my doctors, I was perfectly
healthy: I exercised, followed a whole-foods vegetarian diet, got enough sleep, and practiced
stress relief. So why didn’t I feel healthy?
     To this day, none of the practitioners I’ve seen have ever mentioned celiac disease or
Hashimoto’s, despite the fact that I have tested positive for both. I had to order those tests myself,
based on my own research, while my doctors continued to insist that there was nothing wrong with
me. Sadly, this is a common tale for those of us suffering from autoimmune disorders, and the
question we all want answered is this: “If our practitioners can’t even be relied on to diagnose
our disease correctly, what on earth are we supposed to do about our treatment?”
     I learned to rely on the real experts: other patients. Thanks to people like Sarah, who shared
their stories, successes, and setbacks at a time when the number of autoimmunity blogs could be
counted on one hand, the answer to that question began to emerge. I didn’t really believe that
changing my diet would change my life, but I figured that I had nothing to lose. I gradually
transitioned from a vegan diet to the autoimmune protocol. Within a few months, almost all of my
symptoms vanished. I learned that my migraines and mood swings were caused by all grains, not
just gluten. Cutting out beans, nuts, and nightshades improved my digestion. Limiting fruits and
added sugars controls my chest pain and neuropathy. Keeping up with my full-time job, family,
and social life is no longer an Olympic feat. In fact, I’m enjoying life for the first time since my
symptoms began in high school. I’ve learned that what I put into my body determines how good
I’m going to feel, and that sticking to the Paleo Approach is an easy antidote for feeling awful. I’m
so grateful that I gave it a shot.”
Christina Lynn Feindel blogs at A Clean Plate (acleanplate.com).
Chapter 1
The Causes of Autoimmune Disease


          “Doctors give drugs of which they know little, into bodies, of which they know less, for
          diseases of which they know nothing at all.”
          —VOLTAIRE


Autoimmune disease is a result of the interactions between your genes and your environment—a
perfect storm of factors that cause the immune system to be unable to distinguish self (you) from
invader (not you). The genetic factors at play are complex. In contrast to many inherited diseases (in
which mutations in a single gene or small number of genes directly cause the disease), many different
genes collectively increase vulnerability or susceptibility to autoimmune disease, and unfortunately
only a small number of them have been identified.

The environmental triggers are equally complex and include, but are not limited to, exposure to
chemicals, pollutants, and toxins; bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasite infections (whether in the past
or present); stress (chronic and acute); hormones (whether regulated by the body or
pharmaceutically); diet (including food sensitivities but also the influence of diet on gut health and the
immune system); micronutrient deficiencies; drugs; weight gain; fetal blood cells; and UVB radiation
exposure. While most autoimmune diseases are caused by several elusive environmental factors, for
some the specific environmental factor is known. For example, celiac disease is triggered by the
consumption of gluten; solvent exposure can cause systemic sclerosis; and smoking can contribute to
the development of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis.

While a definitive causal link between diet and autoimmune disease in general has yet to be made,
more and more autoimmune diseases (and many nonautoimmune diseases) are being linked to gluten
sensitivity. While further research is required, some doctors and researchers are even beginning to
believe that gluten sensitivity may be a factor in every autoimmune disease. Furthermore, increased
intestinal permeability (also known as leaky gut, which we’ll talk about in more detail shortly) is
present in every single autoimmune disease in which it has been tested: gluten increases intestinal
permeability.

Environmental factors can be broadly divided into those that are easy to control (like diet, sleep, and
stress) and those that are more challenging or impossible to control (like previous infection and some
forms of chemical exposure). It’s not possible to change your genetics or your infection history, but
you can change what you eat: you can remove the diet and lifestyle triggers of your autoimmune
disease and put your disease into remission. For the sake of clarity, I will discuss diet and lifestyle
separately from all other environmental factors.
A Primer on Proteins, Antibodies, and the Immune System


All autoimmune diseases are caused by a betrayal of the immune system. The immune system, which
is supposed to protect us from invading microorganisms, instead targets normal proteins within our
own bodies, treating these fundamental components of our cells with the exact same lethal force as it
would a virus, bacteria, or parasite. This happens because of autoantibodies. Antibodies are an
essential part of the immune system. Their job is to recognize specific proteins in foreign cells, such
as those in the cell membranes of bacteria, viruses, and parasites. By binding to these invaders,
antibodies signal to immune cells (like white blood cells) that here is something to attack. But with
autoimmune disease, the body accidentally creates antibodies that identify not only foreign proteins as
targets but also the body’s own proteins: these are called autoantibodies (i.e., antibodies that
recognize self). This mistaken identity is called cross-reactivity or molecular mimicry. The formation
of autoantibodies is the first critical step in the development of autoimmune disease.
      Genetics determines the likelihood of someone’s immune system accidentally producing
autoantibodies, but environmental triggers make it happen. Someone who has only a few genes that
increase susceptibility to autoimmunity may have to be exposed to a large variety or dose of
environmental triggers before autoantibodies form. Someone who has a cornucopia of autoimmune
susceptibility genes may need few environmental triggers to tip the balance in the wrong direction.
      Simply producing autoantibodies is not the same as developing autoimmune disease.
Autoimmune disease occurs when:
                     autoantibodies form,
                       the body’s natural backup system for eliminating cells that produce
                      autoantibodies fails,
                     the immune system is stimulated to attack, and
                      enough damage occurs to cells or tissues within the body to manifest as
                      symptoms of a disease.
      Both genetics and environment determine just how aggressive the immune system will be in its
attacks. This is where controlling environmental triggers becomes crucial. Even if your body has
already learned to make autoantibodies, removing the environmental triggers will remove the stimulus
for the immune system to go into overdrive.
      Understanding how the immune system learns to attack your body is important for understanding
why diet and lifestyle factors are critical for managing autoimmune disease. But let’s take a moment
to go over some of the basic biology relevant to autoimmune disease. I have to warn you that the
science is going to get pretty dense, but it will help you understand the discussions in chapters 2 and
3. That said, if you’d rather just read the chapter reviews and skip forward to chapter 5, I promise
that my feelings won’t be hurt.

A Protein’s Structure Is What Allows That Protein to Do Its Job
Proteins, the building blocks of life, are made from long chains of amino acids (the basic structural
units of proteins). While approximately five hundred different amino acids have been identified in
various life-forms, only twenty are used to build every single type of protein in the human body.
Three additional amino acids are found in the human body and can be incorporated into proteins after
being built. Various combinations of amino acids are strung together in chains from twenty to more
than two thousand amino acids long. As you can imagine, there are many ways to string twenty
different amino acids together. This is how twenty simple building blocks form all the proteins in
your body, from the components of the cells of your organs to the hormones that circulate in your
blood.
What Is Post-Translational Modification?
After proteins are synthesized (built by the protein factories in your cells), they can be altered
in a variety of ways (typically by enzymes) to affect the proteins’ function. These alterations
are called post-translational modifications, which just means that they are changes made to
already synthesized proteins. Examples of post-translational modifications are:


          Glycosylation: Attaching carbohydrates to the protein.
          Phosphorylation: Adding a phosphate group to certain amino acids (tyrosine, serine, or
          threonine), which might activate or deactivate the protein (akin to an on-off switch).
          Cleavage of polypeptide chains: Some proteins must be cut into pieces before those
          pieces can perform their function. Insulin, for example, starts out as a longer protein called
          proinsulin, which is then cleaved into two proteins: insulin and C-peptide. This allows for
          more control over insulin activity, since it can be synthesized but not activated until it is
          cleaved. Basically, insulin can be made and stored (as proinsulin), but not activated until
          you need it (when your blood sugar level goes up). Another example: antibodies, which are
          composed of four polypeptide chains.
          Methylation: Adding a methyl group to certain amino acids (lysine or arginine), which
          might activate or deactivate a protein and affect its ability to bind to a receptor or substrate
          (another form of an on-off switch).
          Complexing with metals: Some proteins must form a complex with metal ions—such as
          iron, zinc, and selenium—before becoming active.



The end result of this process is a fully functioning protein that can then be dispatched to the
location, either inside the cell or outside the cell, where it is needed.



     Think of a protein as a long chain made up of a variety of links (maybe of different sizes or
shapes or colors). Proteins are made in every cell of the body by specialized organelles (you can
think of them as protein factories). They are what connect the amino acids according to the recipes in
our DNA. After the proteins are made, they can be modified (this is called post-translational
modification; see above) if needed, and are then shuttled to the location inside or outside the cells to
perform their function.
     The specific sequence of amino acids determines which protein is made. This is called the
protein’s primary structure.
     Different amino acids in the protein chain bind to each other slightly differently. Imagine how a
triangular link and a circular link might fit together, or how two square links might fit together. So this
chain of amino acids has natural kinks and folds, depending on the sequence of links. The type of kink
or fold will tell you whether you are looking at the protein’s secondary or tertiary structure.
Secondary structures are the smallest regular repeated structures within a protein. Certain sequences
of amino acids create spirals in the chain, while others create flat sheets. These are called the
protein’s secondary structure. Tertiary structure refers to the larger kinks and folds in which the
secondary structures are folded in upon themselves in complex ways. Both secondary and tertiary
structures are a direct result of the primary structure—the specific amino acid sequence. The precise
way amino acids connect to each other determines how the protein will fold in on itself.
     There is also a quaternary structure, which refers to situations where several proteins (either the
same or different) bind together (which is necessary for some proteins to do their job). Some proteins
are composed of several short proteins, called peptides or polypeptides, which are not complete
proteins in themselves. They’re more like protein fragments, but when they bind together they can
form a complete protein.
     The finished shape, or “structure,” of the protein enables the protein to perform its function in the
body.


Antibodies Are a Type of Protein Whose Function Is Recognizing
Specific Antigens


Antibodies are a type of protein technically called immunoglobins. Their job is to recognize
sequences of amino acids in other proteins. By binding to a part of its structure necessary for its
function, antibodies can often deactivate a foreign protein. Most important, when an antibody binds to
a protein, it signals to the immune system that these are foreign proteins that must be attacked. And,
just as with every other protein, it is the structure of antibodies that determines their function.
      Antibodies consist of four polypeptides (short chains of amino acids that aren’t a complete
protein by themselves): the two longer polypeptides are called heavy chains, the two shorter ones
light chains. These polypeptides form a Y-shaped molecule. On each tip of the Y is a region called
the antigen binding site, which binds to the specific sequence of amino acids (called the epitope) on
the foreign protein (called the antigen) that the antibody is designed to recognize. Think of the tips of
the antibody Y as two identical locks. The sequence of amino acids on the foreign protein is the
specific key that fits into either lock.
      There are five types, or classes, of antibody, characterized by the type of heavy-chain
polypeptide they contain: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM antibodies (see here). The type of antibody
determines the mechanism used to destroy the antigen it binds to (and the invading microorganism that
the antigen belongs to). I’ll come back to the types of antibodies after discussing the immune system in
more detail.
What Are Essential Amino Acids?
Of the twenty amino acids that are the building blocks of the thousands of different proteins in the
human body, eight are considered essential. The other twelve are considered nonessential because
they can be synthesized in the body from other amino acids. The term nonessential can be deceiving:
it refers to the fact that the amino acids don’t have to be consumed in the diet, not to whether or not
they are essential for life, which they are. As I will discuss later in the book, even though the
nonessential amino acids can be synthesized by the body, the process may be inefficient, which can
lead to deficiencies if they are not consumed as part of a protein-rich, varied diet.




Antibody or Autoantibody?
An autoantibody is an antibody that binds to an epitope (that is, a specific sequence of amino acids) in
a protein in your body (auto means “self”). Autoantibodies are also called self-targeted antibodies.
Autoantibodies can belong to any of the five classes of antibody.
What Are Cytokines?

Cytokines are a large and diverse group of chemicals released by the cells of the immune system.
They act as messengers between the cells of both the innate and adaptive immune systems. Different
cytokines have different effects. Some activate immune cells. (Different cytokines activate different
cells.) Others help regulate inflammation and the immune system by deactivating the cells of the
immune system. Beyond acting as messengers, cytokines can have direct effects on foreign invaders.
Some are particularly toxic to viruses, bacteria, fungi, or parasites and are big guns in the body’s
defense system. Others are used to destroy infected cells or tumor cells in the body.



     Both the production of antibodies and the destruction of the foreign invaders that the antibodies
bind to are the job of the immune system. When an antibody binds to an antigen (a foreign protein), it
says to the immune system, “There is something here that shouldn’t be here.” Even though the antibody
binds to only a small part of one protein, the whole organism is labeled a foreign invader. The
immune system is very efficient at dealing with these invaders, and it can do so in many ways.
Understanding how the immune system works is important in understanding what goes wrong in
autoimmune disease, so let’s delve even deeper into human biology and talk about the immune system.




What Is the Immune System Supposed to Attack?




The answer is this: anything that doesn’t belong. It could be foreign organisms, like viruses, bacteria,
fungi, or parasites. These are called pathogens (foreign organisms that make us sick). It could be a
cell of the body that is infected with a foreign organism (called a pathogen-infected cell). It could
also be some other foreign material: toxins, bacterial fragments, cell fragments, protein fragments,
and even foreign objects like dirt. (Think of how inflamed and full of pus your skin can become when
you get a sliver in your finger.)




The Immune System (and Where Antibodies Fit In)

The immune system is your body’s entire department of defense. It encompasses a vast variety of
cells, antibodies, proteins, and chemicals that work together in the same way that a combination of
infantry, cavalry, navy, air force, specialized weapons systems, nuclear submarines, stealth bombers,
drone missiles, and the like might all be marshaled to fight a war.
     The immune system is divided into two complementary, but different, defense systems:
                     The innate immune system (also called the nonspecific immune system)
                      The adaptive immune system (also called the specific or acquired immune
                     system)

The Innate Immune System

You are probably familiar with the term inflammation. From the inflamed skin around a scrape to the
swelling of a twisted ankle to the runny nose of hay fever to the atherosclerosis that can eventually
lead to a heart attack—all are the result of inflammation. Inflammation is actually a broad term that
describes the actions of the innate immune system. This includes the activities of several cell types as
well as many specific proteins that, together, form the body’s first line of defense against infection
and are essential for healing from injury.
     The innate immune system is activated by two types of cell—macrophages and immature
dendritic cells (types of antigen-presenting cells; see here)—both of which reside in every tissue of
the body. These cells act as sentinels, ready to respond when an organism (or other foreign material)
breaches the body’s line of defense. These cells are especially important in barrier tissues—any part
of the body that divides the inside of the body from the outside world, such as the skin, gut, and
mucous membranes of the nose and lungs. When a pathogen does break through, the macrophages and
immature dendritic cells identify it, thanks to specialized receptors on their cell membranes (pathogen
recognition receptors, which include a class of receptors called Toll-like receptors, TLRs). Once
activated at the site of infection (or the site of the inflammatory stimulus), these cells produce
specialized chemical messengers called cytokines.
     Cytokines can be toxic to some pathogens directly, but more important, they attract other
macrophages and dendritic cells as well as white blood cells from the blood and lymph to help out
(which is called recruitment). The quickest white blood cells to respond are called granulocytes (so-
called because they contain structures called granules), specifically a type of granulocyte called
neutrophils.
     Cytokines also activate the recruited inflammatory cells. Activated inflammatory cells will
produce more cytokines (thereby perpetuating inflammation), but they also do an important job. These
inflammatory cells (the macrophages and dendritic cells that started it all, plus the granulocytes
recruited from the blood) are very good at “eating” foreign objects and damaged cells through a
process called phagocytosis. Collectively, these “eater” cells (any cell that has the ability to
phagocytose) are called phagocytes. Granulocytes in particular, once activated, will continue to eat
until they die. (Pus is mostly dead neutrophils.) In this way, the innate immune system can also create
a physical or chemical barrier between the injury or infection and the rest of the body.
      Another part of the innate immune system is the aptly named complement system. This is a set of
proteins (called complement proteins) that circulate in the blood and can quickly reach the site of
invasion or injury, where these proteins react directly with antigens. When activated, these proteins
can both recruit inflammatory cells to the area and coat foreign proteins or microorganisms as a
signal to inflammatory cells to devour them. Complement proteins can also directly kill some types of
invading microorganisms. These proteins literally complement the other components of the innate
immune system, which is the source of their confusing name. The complement system is important
because it helps focus the nonspecific innate immune system and minimize damage to healthy cells
(although this still isn’t as targeted as the adaptive immune system).
      The innate immune system also includes cells like platelets and proteins such as thrombins that
are responsible for blood clotting. There are also a variety of molecules produced by the innate
immune system that control blood flow by dilating blood vessels (that is, increasing their diameter).
Blood vessels also become more permeable (or leaky), allowing the fluid component of blood, called
plasma, to leak out of the blood vessels and into the inflamed tissues (this is what swelling, or edema,
is made of).
      The innate immune system is very quick to mobilize and acts as the body’s first line of defense.
However, the trade-off for this speed is that the innate immune system it is not specific or targeted,
meaning that the actions of the innate immune system look pretty much the same regardless of the
reason that the innate immune system is activated. And, perhaps more important, the innate immune
system doesn’t generally differentiate between foreign invaders, damaged cells that need to be
cleaned up, and healthy cells (perhaps those adjacent to the site of injury or infection), with the
exception of the targeting that can be provided by complement proteins.
      Because the innate immune system is nonspecific, healthy tissue can often be caught in the
crossfire. This happens when phagocytes or cytokines damage healthy cells that just happen to be in
the neighborhood. This isn’t a big deal when it comes to a wound, when inflammation is crucial to the
healing process but is also relatively contained. However, in the context of chronic stress, persistent
infection, some hormone imbalances, or a diet rich in proinflammatory foods, the signals to produce
inflammation become chronic. In this case, inflammation can become bodywide (that is, systemic or
generalized), and although this inflammation is typically more diffuse, it can damage healthy tissue
throughout the body on an ongoing basis (an important concept addressed in chapter 2).
      The innate immune system is fast to respond and can sometimes handle the whole job (for
example, in healing from a scrape). In this case, the production of cytokines that recruit additional
cells ebbs while different cytokines work to turn off inflammation by deactivating macrophages and
dendritic cells. When the innate immune system is insufficient to deal with the infection or injury, the
adaptive immune system becomes engaged. As inflammatory cells are recruited to the site of an
infection or injury, they activate the adaptive immune system through a process known as antigen
presentation (see below). The adaptive immune system then takes over, with an even more complex
collection of cells and proteins to affect a targeted and coordinated attack on the invaders.
Antigen Presentation
When an inflammatory cell (specifically a macrophage or a dendritic cell) eats a foreign invader, a
protein fragment from the invader is left on the surface of the inflammatory cell’s own membrane.
This protein fragment is bound to a special protein embedded in the cell’s surface called the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC). The MHC’s job is to present antigens from foreign invaders the
cell has already eaten to the adaptive immune system, like saying, “Hey, look what I found.” When
this inflammatory cell meets a type of white blood cell called a helper T cell (either by traveling to
the nearest lymph node or by recruitment of lymphocytes to the area by cytokines or complement
proteins), the helper T cell recognizes the antigen presented in the MHC and is activated. Once
activated, the helper T cells start to divide and produce proteins that activate B cells and other types
of T cells as well as other immune cells.
      Every cell has MHC proteins embedded in its surface membranes that display fragments of
proteins from the inside of the cell, including fragments of normal proteins and fragments from
invading microorganisms, if present. This constant display of protein fragments by every cell helps
the immune system patrol the body for infected cells: it’s like a cell raising a red flag if it gets
infected.
The Immune System

INNATE
IMMUNE
SYSTEM
Component       Function
                                 Skin, gut, lungs, saliva, etc. all provide a physical barrier between the
Physical
                                 inside of the body and the outside, which is difficult for pathogens to
Barriers
                                 cross.
CELLULAR
                Cells     that
Phagocytes
                engulf   and
(“Eater”
                destroy
Cells)          pathogens.
                                 Reside in connective tissues and organs of the body and act as sentinels.
                                 These “eater” cells produce cytokines that can kill pathogens, stimulate
Macrophages
                                 other phagocytes, and activate T cells and B cells. Responsible for
                                 antigen presentation to T cells and B cells.
                                 Reside in barrier tissues of the body and act as sentinels. These “eater”
Dendritic                        cells produce cytokines that can kill pathogens, stimulate other
Cells                            phagocytes, and activate T cells and B cells. Responsible for antigen
                                 presentation to T cells and B cells.
                                 White blood cells with the ability to divide and mature into other
Monocytes                        immune cell types recruited to site of infection to replenish
                                 macrophages and dendritic cells.
Granulocytes                     White blood cells recruited to site of infection that are particularly
                                 good “eater” cells. They rapidly engulf cells coated with antibodies or
(Neutrophils,
                                 complement and secrete cytokines that can kill pathogens and stimulate
Eosinophils,
                                 more macrophages and dendritic cells. Eosinophils also have the ability
Basophils)                       to present antigens to T cells and B cells.
                                 Reside in most tissues surrounding blood vessels and nerves. When
                                 activated, they release histamine (a key component of allergic
Mast Cells
                                 reactions), the anticoagulant heparin, and cytokines, which causes
                                 swelling and attracts more “eater” cells.
                                 White blood cells recruited to site of infection specifically to destroy
                                 virally infected cells of the body, similar to cytotoxic T cells but
Natural
                                 respond more quickly. They also play a role in the adaptive immune
Killer Cells
                                 system by maintaining immunologic memory, similar to memory T cells
                                 and memory B cells.
HUMORAL
                                 Includes 25 proteins produced by the liver that circulate in the blood.
                                 When activated, complement proteins bind to the surface of pathogens,
Complement                       sometimes directly killing the pathogen, but also attracting macrophages
                                 and neutrophils, and facilitating phagocytosis (engulfment of the
                                 pathogen) by these “eater” cells.
                                 A huge collection of chemicals that act as messengers between the cells
Cytokines
                                 of the immune system. Some cytokines can directly kill pathogens.
ADAPTIVE
IMMUNE
SYSTEM
                 Lymphocytes produced in the bone marrow that circulate throughout the
                 body via blood and lymphatic vessels, patrolling for antigens that match
B Cells
                 their antibodies/receptors. When B cells are activated, they divide
                 rapidly, producing many plasma B cells and some memory B cells.
plasma       B   Act as antibody factories, releasing thousands of antibodies into the
cells            blood or connective tissues.

memory       B   Patrol the body to mount a faster response upon subsequent infection
cells            with the same pathogen.
                 Secreted by plasma B cells. Antibodies bind to antigens, which can
Antibodies       directly inactivate pathogens, stimulate release of complement proteins,
                 and activate phagocytes, mast cells, and natural killer cells.
                 Lymphocytes that are produced in the bone marrow and mature in the
                 thymus gland that circulate throughout the body via blood and lymphatic
                 vessels, patrolling for antigens that match their receptors. T cells are
T cells          broadly divided into two groups based on the presence of either CD4 or
                 CD8 proteins in their cell membranes. T cells are considered naïve T
                 cells until they are activated by cytokines and receptor binding (when
                 they differentiate into one of the subtypes below).
CELLULAR
                 CD8+ T cells that specialize in attacking cells of the body infected by
cytotoxic    T   viruses and some bacteria. Cytotoxic T cells release chemicals called
cells            cytotoxins, which cause infected cells to die by cell suicide (a process
                 called apoptosis).
                 CD4+ T cells that are the major driving force and regulators of the
helper T cells   adaptive immune defense. Which specific cytokines stimulate naïve T
                 cells determine which type of helper T cell will be formed.
                 Release cytokines that recruit and stimulate macrophages and dendritic
Th1 cells        cells. Th1 cells also secrete cytokines that stimulate maturation of
                 CD8+ naïve T cells into cytotoxic T cells.
                 Activate B cells which then divide rapidly to produce plasma B cells
Th2 cells
                 and memory B cells.
                 Protect the gut mucosa from nonpathogenic antigens (foreign substances
Th3 cells        other than viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites). Th3 cells act as
                 immune modulators by suppressing Th1 and Th2 cells.

Th9 cells        Similar to Th2 cells. Th9 cells activate B cells.
Th17 cells                    Similar to Th1 cells. Th17 cells stimulate inflammatory cells.


Th22 cells                    Similar to Th1 cells. Th22 cells stimulate inflammatory cells.

                              Control the activation of memory T cells and suppress Th1- and Th2-
Tr1 cells
                              mediated immune responses to pathogens, tumors, and “self.”

Tfh cells                     Regulate the formation of memory B cells and memory T cells.

                              Suppress the activity of immune and inflammatory cells to shut down T
                              cell-mediated immunity toward the end of an immune reaction.
regulatory T
                              Regulatory T cells also suppress activation of dendritic cells and
cells
                              suppress the activity of any T cells that recognize self and therefore
                              have the ability to attack healthy cells within the body.
                              Similar to memory B cells with a longer life span. Memory T cells
memory       T
                              patrol the body to mount a faster response upon subsequent infection
cells
                              with the same pathogen.

The Adaptive Immune System

Adaptive immunity is distinguished from innate immunity by its specificity for an invading organism.
It also remembers invaders (this is called immunological memory) so that it responds more intensely
and quickly to subsequent infections. The adaptive immune system is why vaccines protect us against
infection and why we get chicken pox only once. The adaptive immune system is responsible for
recognizing enemies and distinguishing an antigen that is foreign from normal, healthy cells and
proteins in the body. The adaptive immune system also tailors responses to eliminate specific
pathogens or pathogen-infected cells in the most effective and efficient way possible.
      The adaptive immune system is responsible for attacking the body in autoimmune disease, so it’s
worth delving into in more detail. There are two types of adaptive immune responses: humoral and
cellular.

Humoral Immunity. This form of immunity is mediated by a type of white blood cell called B cells,
or B lymphocytes, which are formed in the bone marrow and are released into the blood and
lymphatic system as needed. B cells produce antibodies. The production of antibodies to fight foreign
invaders enables the adaptive immune system to be specific. Each B cell has one specific antibody
embedded in its surface membrane (called a B cell receptor). The body makes millions of different B
cells every day, each recognizing a different antigen. As the B cell circulates through the body (via
the blood and lymphatic system), it searches for the antigen matching its specific receptors. If it finds
its antigen, it connects to it, and a triggering signal is set off inside the B cell. The B cell now needs
proteins (cytokines) produced by helper T cells to become fully activated. When this happens, the B
cell starts to divide to produce clones of itself (more and more B cells with receptors to that specific
antigen). During this process, two new types of B cell are created: plasma B cells (which produce
and secrete large amounts of antibodies into the body to help propel the immune attack) and memory
B cells (which are responsible for detecting infections the body has had before). Most of the new B
cells will be plasma B cells, which can produce antibodies at an amazing rate and can release tens of
thousands of antibodies per second.
     When the antibodies released by plasma B cells bind to their antigen, they signal to the “eater”
cells (phagocytes) and complement proteins of the innate immune system that there is work to be
done. When the innate and adaptive immune systems join forces like this, healing is fast and effective.

Cellular Immunity. This type is mediated by a type of white blood cell called T cells or T
lymphocytes. These cells are also formed in the bone marrow and are released while still immature
into the blood. T cells travel to the thymus gland and develop (that is, mature) within the gland.
(That’s where the T in the name comes from; see here.) Once the T cells mature in the thymus gland,
they travel to other locations throughout the body via the blood and lymphatic systems. The thymus
gland releases two major classes of T cells into the body, which are distinguished by which of two
different glycoproteins (a protein with a carbohydrate attached) are embedded in their cell
membranes. These glycoproteins are called CD4 and CD8 (CD stands for “cluster of differentiation,”
a name that originates from before the function of CD4 and CD8 were understood and they were
simply used to differentiate between these two major classes of T cells). CD4 and CD8 act as co-
receptors for the T cell receptor (which is similar to an antibody but less specific, so it can bind to
several different antigens), meaning that they work together with the T cell receptor to recognize
foreign invaders.
      What’s important to note is that there are many different types of T cells and that they can be
classified based on whether they have CD4 or CD8 (and in some cases neither) in their cell
membrane.
      The T cell receptor is different from a B cell receptor (which works just like an antibody). T
cells recognize fragments of foreign proteins that have been partly degraded inside the cell. Proteins,
whether normal proteins belonging to the cell or those of an invading organism like a virus, are
constantly being recycled inside cells. Fragments of these proteins are then carried to the surface of
the cell and bound to special cell-surface molecules called major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
proteins. The MHC is the cell’s mechanism for waving a red flag if it is infected by a virus or
bacteria.
      Most cells are capable of presenting antigens and activating the adaptive immune system once
infected (as opposed to macrophages and dendritic cells, which present antigens to the adaptive
immune system after “eating” a foreign invader). If the cell is healthy, only protein fragments of
normal proteins are displayed (and the T cell is not activated by its receptor binding with it). If the
cell is infected, fragments of foreign proteins (along with some normal proteins belonging to the cell)
are displayed. When the T cell receptor binds to the foreign proteins, the T cell becomes activated—
it’s like a switch has been turned on so the cell knows it needs to start doing its job. What happens
next depends on what type of T cell it is.
      T cells are either CD4-positive (CD4+) or CD8-positive (CD8+). When the T cells leave the
thymus, they can be classified based on whether they are CD4+ or CD8+, but they aren’t “fully
differentiated,” meaning that they haven’t completely matured into the specific subtype of cell they
will become. Each CD4+ and CD8+ T cell has the ability to become any of several different types of
mature (fully differentiated) T cells. This last stage of maturation (differentiation) occurs when the
cells are activated through receptor binding (meaning that it finds a foreign protein in the MHC) and
by cytokines (those chemical messengers of inflammation secreted by other inflammatory and immune
cells). It’s analogous to someone graduating from school and being ready to dive into the workforce:
there are many jobs she might be qualified to do, so she applies for a variety of positions. She doesn’t
start working until after she’s been interviewed, been offered a job, and gone through orientation. T
cells are called naïve T cells (kind of like fresh-out-of-college job-seekers clueless about the job
market) when they leave the thymus, and it is the environment they find themselves in that causes them
to become a specific type of T cell.
      So what are the different types of T cells and what are their jobs?

    Cytotoxic T cells (or killer T cells) are CD8+ T cells that attack cells of the body infected by
viruses and some bacteria. Cytotoxic T cells are like sentries looking for cells displaying foreign
protein fragments in their MHC proteins. Cytotoxic T cells can also be activated by antigen-
presenting cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, by B cells, and by helper T cells (more on
these below). When activated (turned on by cytokines and by finding a foreign protein fragment),
cytotoxic T cells kill the infected cell. (Perhaps more insidiously, cytotoxic T cells kill infected cells
by inciting them to commit cell suicide, which is called apoptosis.) Cytotoxic T cells also attack
cancer cells and are implicated in transplant rejection.

    Helper T cells are a type of CD4+ T cell and are both the major driving force and the main
regulators of the adaptive immune defense. They cannot kill infected cells or clear pathogens
themselves; rather, they control the immune response by directing other cells to perform these tasks.
Helper T cells are activated by the innate immune system through antigen presentation (see here).
Once activated, helper T cells start to divide rapidly and release cytokines (those chemical
messengers of inflammation). Several different subtypes of helper T cells can be formed, including
Th1, Th2, Th3, Th9, Th17, Th22, Tr1, and Tfh. Each subtype secretes different cytokines to facilitate
different types of immune response. The specific subtype of helper T cell that a naïve CD4+ T cell
differentiates (matures) into is determined by the specific signals received from the antigen-
presenting cells.
     The important helper T cells for driving the immune system and inflammation are Th1, Th2, Th9,
Th17, and Th22 cells. Th1 cells recruit and regulate nonspecific immune cells, such as macrophages,
and secrete cytokines that stimulate T cells to mature into cytotoxic T cells. Th2 cells activate B cells
(which then divide rapidly and secrete antibodies). Th9 cells are similar to Th2 cells (they are
activated by different cytokines) and are important for host defense against parasitic infections
(specifically helminth worms), but are also implicated in the development of chronic allergic
inflammation, airway remodeling such as in asthma, and autoimmune disease. Th17 cells are similar
to Th1 cells (they secrete different cytokines), are highly inflammatory, and are activated in response
to certain bacteria and parasites. Excessive numbers of activated Th17 cells are present and probably
responsible for tissue damage in some autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, and inflammatory bowel disorders. There is also some evidence that Th17 cells may have a
regulatory function similar to Th3 cells or Tr1 cells (see below), but the research on this isn’t
conclusive. Th22 cells are also similar to Th1 cells (they secrete different cytokines than Th1 and
Th17 cells) and have been implicated in inflammatory skin disorders such as psoriasis, atopic
eczema, and allergic contact dermatitis.
What Is Th1 and Th2 Dominance?
It is believed that one of the contributing factors in autoimmune disease is an imbalance in the
subtypes of helper T cells. Specifically, certain autoimmune diseases tend to be associated with
overactivation of Th1 cells or Th2 cells, which is known as Th1 or Th2 dominance, respectively.
There are no hard and fast rules, though. For example, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is most often, but not
always, associated with Th1 dominance; Th2-dominant Hashimoto’s thyroiditis exists as well.
Perhaps more important, dominance can rapidly switch back and forth in response to a variety of
stimuli, such as nutritional status (meaning that deficiencies or surpluses in various micronutrients can
cause a shift from Th1 to Th2 dominance and vice versa).
      How important Th1 versus Th2 dominance is to the development or treatment of disease remains
unclear, especially as the identification of other helper T cells shows that the system is much more
complicated than originally thought. Some alternative health care professionals employ strategies
(typically botanicals) aimed at stimulating Th1 or Th2 cells (whichever are lower in number, which
is determined by a blood test) to bring “balance” to the immune system (which sometimes works
because Th1 and Th2 cells can suppress each other). However, the imbalance in Th1 and Th2 is also
indicative of inadequate or ineffectual Th3 cells, Tr1 cells, and regulatory T cells, which are not
accounted for in these “immune balancing” strategies. Plus, these strategies fail to account for the
contributions of Th9, Th17, and Th22 cells.
      Balance between Th1 and Th2 (and indeed among Th9, Th17, and Th22) can also be achieved
by focusing on bodywide reduction of inflammation, removal of immune system triggers, and
supporting healthy Th3, Tr1, and regulatory T cell production and activity. Basically, balance can be
achieved naturally by following the Paleo Approach—no immune-stimulating botanicals required!



     There are also helper T cells that are immune modulators: their job is to help suppress the
immune system. Th3 cells (also known as adaptive regulatory T cells or induced regulatory T cells)
protect the lining of the gut (the gut mucosa, or mucosal barrier of the gut) from nonpathogenic
antigens (foreign substances other than viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites). Th3 cells also
suppress Th1 and Th2 cells, making Th3 cells important immune modulators. Tr1 cells (also called
type 1 regulatory T cells), which are similar to Th3 cells (they secrete different cytokines than Th3
cells), control the activation of memory T cells (see below) and suppress Th1- and Th2-mediated
immune responses to pathogens, tumors, and “self.”
     Tfh cells (also called follicular helper T cells) are important regulators of the formation of
memory B cells and memory T cells. Memory T cells are similar to memory B cells but typically
have a longer life span (although the life span of both memory B and T cells varies depending on the
pathogen they are “remembering” and can be weeks, years, or even decades). The second time an
intruder tries to invade the body, memory B and T cells help the immune system respond much faster:
the invader is wiped out before you notice any symptoms. Memory T cells can be either CD4+ or
CD8+.

   Regulatory T cells (which used to be called suppressor T cells) are CD4+ T cells that are
crucial for regulating the adaptive immune system. These cells suppress the activity of immune and
inflammatory cells to shut down T cell-mediated immunity toward the end of an immune reaction.
Their immune modulating activity extends to the innate immune system as regulatory T cells can also
suppress activation of dendritic cells. Regulatory T cells maintain “immune tolerance,” or the process
by which the immune system tolerates and chooses not to attack an antigen (which is important during
pregnancy, for example). Beyond this, regulatory T cells have the critical job of suppressing the
activity of any T cells that recognize self and therefore might attack healthy cells in the body. A lack
(or perhaps reduced ability) of regulatory T cells is thought to be crucial in the development of
autoimmune disease. Cytokines produced by Th3 cells may be important in the activation of
regulatory T cells.
      Th3 cells, Tr1 cells, and regulatory T cells perform similar functions, and their different roles in
the body are still not well understood. Th3 and Tr1 cells are considered to be induced regulatory T
cells, which means that they start off as naïve CD4+ T cells, released by the thymus into the body, and
differentiate (that is, reach full maturity) in the periphery of the body when they are activated by
specific cytokines. By contrast, regulatory T cells (also called naturally occurring regulatory T cells)
differentiate in the thymus. These cells also suppress the immune system using different mechanisms:
Th3 and Tr1 cells utilize cytokines to control immune system activation (in this case, by releasing
cytokines that turn off inflammation and deactivate immune cells); regulatory T cells suppress the
activity of immune cells through direct interaction with those cells (although exactly how remains
unknown).
      OK, that was a metric ton of information. And I realize that the nomenclature for all these
different cell types sounds like gobbledygook, but I hope the table here will help you keep them
straight. And I promise that if you stay with me, all will become clear.
      Each cell type has a specific job within the immune system, and the interactions between these
cells are complex. What’s more, there may actually be immune cell types that have yet to be
identified. What’s important to understand is that beyond the many cell types involved in
inflammation, identification and destruction of infected cells and foreign invaders, and antibody
formation, there are several cell types whose job is to suppress the immune system once the invader
is conquered. When these cells don’t do their job well, you get immune and autoimmune diseases.

How and Why Does the Body Create Antibodies Against Itself?

Without the production of autoantibodies (antibodies that recognize amino acid sequences present in
proteins in our own cells), autoimmune disease would not exist. But how are autoantibodies actually
formed?
      You may be aware of fun little biology factoids like this one: there is a 67 percent similarity
between human DNA and the DNA of an earthworm. This is because the fundamentals of life are
universal. There are some strong commonalities between some proteins across all forms of life, from
humans to the viruses that try to infect us to the plants we eat. (There are lots of differences too, but
the similarities are the problem when it comes to autoimmune disease.)
      If you recall from here, antibodies recognize a very small piece of a protein, a sequence
typically fifteen amino acids long. And all eukaryotic beings build their proteins from the same twenty
amino acids. Eukaryotes are life-forms that have cells with internal structures, called organelles,
separated by membranes. This includes all animals (from humans to parasitical worms), plants, and
fungi (like yeast). Even though there are millions of ways twenty amino acids can combine to form
unique proteins, certain sequences tend to repeat in many proteins—both proteins in our own bodies
and proteins among species. When you start to look at one small piece of those proteins, there are
only so many possible sequences of fifteen amino acids that an antibody can recognize. When an
antibody forms against one protein (say, a part of a protein in the cell wall of a pathogenic bacteria),
there is a chance that that antibody will also bind to another protein. When this happens, it’s called
molecular mimicry or antibody cross-reaction. It’s helpful if that antibody happens to bind to proteins
in several types of bacteria because that protects us from infection. It’s not helpful if that antibody
binds to a normal protein in the human body. Basically, autoantibody formation is just an accident.
      Certain factors increase the likelihood of autoantibody formation. Genes are key, but so are
environmental triggers (discussed in more detail on here and here). Certain infections are highly
likely to result in autoimmune disease, especially in the context of specific gene mutations. For
example, someone with the HLA-B27 gene variant (see here) who becomes infected with Klebsiella
pneumoniae (a bacteria that can cause pneumonia) will have a substantially increased risk of
developing the autoimmune disease ankylosing spondylitis. However, if that same person is infected
with Proteus mirabilis (a bacteria that can cause kidney stones and pneumonia) instead, he will have
a substantially increased risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. Another very important trigger that
I’ll discuss in much more detail later (in this chapter and in chapter 2) is dietary gluten. While dietary
gluten is clearly the trigger behind celiac disease, it also appears to play a role in a vast number of
autoimmune diseases.
      In many ways, it’s just bad luck that an antibody meant to attack a foreign invader attacks a
protein within the human body instead. Because of the similarities in some proteins across all forms
of life, the odds are extremely high of this happening at some point in most people. In fact, it almost
certainly happens frequently in just about everyone. So, if accidental autoantibody formation is
normal, why does it cause autoimmune disease in some people and not in others?




Antibody Classes and the Immune System
Antibodies can either be free to circulate in the blood or other bodily fluids (secreted by plasma
B cells) or be bound to the surface membranes of B cells. There are five main classes of
antibodies, each with a different niche within the immune system.

          IgA antibodies are found in mucosal areas (i.e., barriers between the inside of the body and
          the outside of the body), such as the gut, respiratory tract, and genitourinary tract. They are
          also found in saliva, tears, and breast milk. Their main function is to prevent pathogens
          from entering the circulatory system. IgA formation is regulated by Th3 cells.
          IgD antibodies function mainly as antigen receptors on the cell membranes of B cells that
          have not been exposed to antigens (i.e., immature B cells). They are also known to activate
          other immune cells (basophils and mast cells) to produce cytokines (chemical messengers
          of inflammation).
          IgE antibodies bind to allergens and trigger histamine release from specialized cells (mast
          cells and basophils), thereby causing the symptoms of allergy. They also have an important
          role in protection from parasites.
          IgG antibodies are secreted by plasma B cells and provide the majority of antibody-based
          immunity from pathogens. Approximately 75 percent of the antibodies circulating in the
          blood at any given time are IgGs. They are also the only antibodies capable of crossing the
          placenta to provide passive immunity to the fetus.
          IgM antibodies are expressed on the surface of B cells and are secreted by plasma B cells
          in the early stages of humoral immunity before there is sufficient IgG. IgM interacts with the
          innate immune system to direct complement proteins and macrophages to attack the antigen
          it binds to.




     The body has ways of making sure that accidental autoantibody formation doesn’t end up
focusing the immune system on our own proteins. One way is a process called selection, where T
cells and B cells that recognize self are destroyed. This occurs in both the thymus gland and bone
marrow and is discussed adjacently. Another way is called suppression, where regulatory T cells,
Th3 cells, and Tr1 cells quash autoantibody production from cells that escaped selection. However,
in autoimmune disease, this process breaks down. It isn’t completely understood exactly why this
happens. It could be that those with a genetic predisposition to develop autoimmune disease
accidentally produce more autoantibodies than the system can suppress. It could be that those with a
genetic predisposition to develop autoimmune disease also tend to have a lot of inflammation, causing
the immune system to be so overwhelmed that it can’t perform this important task. The thymus gland
and bone marrow may not be great at preventing release of B cells and T cells that recognize self
(through “selection”). Those with a genetic predisposition to develop autoimmune disease may not
make as many regulatory T cells and Th3 and Tr1 cells to suppress the activity of immune cells that
recognize self. And of course, the strength of the stimulus from the trigger is an important factor.
     So it isn’t so much about how the body learns to make antibodies that recognize self as about
why the cells that produce those antibodies are allowed to live. Once a person develops one
autoimmune disease, she is at a much higher risk of developing a second or third one. Once the
immune system starts attacking one cell type in the body, it’s not hard for it to learn how to attack
another type. Once the system breaks down to the point that the immune system can’t differentiate self
from invader, all it has to do is whip up a different autoantibody. And any number of dietary,
infectious, or other environmental triggers can result in the formation of new autoantibodies.




Normal Suppression of Autoantibodies: The Thymus Gland and
Bone Marrow
All T cells originate from specific stem cells in the bone marrow. They are released into the blood,
where they travel to the thymus gland to mature and divide. The main purpose of the thymus gland is
to “educate” the T cells that mature there. Immature T cells within the thymus gland are called
thymocytes. The youngest thymocytes (called double-negative cells) do not have CD4 or CD8 in their
cell membranes. As they develop, they become double-positive thymocytes, expressing both CD4 and
CD8 in their membranes. Finally, they mature to single-positive (CD4+ or CD8+) thymocytes, which
are then released from the thymus (as naïve T cells) to do their jobs in the rest of the body.
      About 98 percent of thymocytes die during the development processes by failing one of two tests
performed on them by the cells of the thymus gland.
      The first test, called positive selection, is performed on double-positive thymocytes. The
process of positive selection verifies that thymocytes have the capability to interact with the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC; see here). Thymocytes that fail the positive-selection test
(because they don’t interact with the MHC) die. Positive selection also directs the double-positive
thymocytes that pass the test to become either CD4+ or CD8+ thymocytes.




There are actually two classes of MHC proteins. Which one the thymocyte interacts with more
strongly will determine whether it becomes a CD4+ or a CD8+ thymocyte.

      The second test, called negative selection, verifies that thymocytes do not bind strongly with self
peptides (protein fragments). Thymocytes that fail the negative-selection test (because they recognize
self and would thus be able to attack normal healthy cells within the human body) die or are selected
to become regulatory T cells.
      Only the thymocytes that pass both the positive- and negative-selection tests are released into the
body. They are called naïve T cells upon release because they still need to be activated through
receptor binding and by cytokines to stimulate differentiation—that is, maturation into whatever T
cell type they will become.
      Immature B cells are also tested for the ability to bind to self peptides within the bone marrow
before being released into the circulation. If a B cell receptor (the antibodies embedded into the cell
membrane of the B cell) binds too strongly to “self” antigens, the B cell is not allowed to mature.
Depending on how strongly the B-cell receptor binds to self antigens, the B cell will either die, have
its receptor modified and be retested, or be shut down into a state of permanent unresponsiveness (so
the B cell doesn’t die but can’t actually do anything).
      There’s a further redundancy in the system. If a T cell or B cell does happen to recognize self but
manages to escape into the circulation (blood or lymph), regulatory T cells, Th3 cells, and Tr1 cells
are supposed to shut them down (they can suppress activation of, deactivate, or kill the truant T cell
or B cell).
      Interestingly, the thymus contributes fewer cells as a person ages. As the thymus shrinks by about
3 percent a year throughout middle age, there is a corresponding fall in the thymic production of naïve
T cells, leaving peripheral T cell expansion (the creation of induced regulatory T cells—i.e., Th3 and
Tr1 cells) to play a greater role in protecting older people from pathogens.
The Major Contributors to Autoimmune Disease

Autoimmune disease is caused when the immune system loses the ability to distinguish self from
foreign invaders. On top of this, the immune system must also be stimulated to attack. How this
actually happens is complex and involves the interaction of three major factors:
                    Genetic susceptibility
                     Environmental triggers, infection, or bad luck
                    Diet and lifestyle
     As I mentioned before, there is nothing we can do about our genetic susceptibility. Nor do we
have much control over infections or even our exposure to certain environmental triggers. However,
understanding a little more about them can be helpful in understanding how important it is to control
what we can, namely diet and lifestyle.


Genetics

Unlike other genetic diseases, such as sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, and some forms of breast
cancer, which involve a mutation in a single gene or a small handful of genes, autoimmune disease
involves many genes. Mutations (or rather what is termed variants, which means a specific form of a
gene that you inherit from one or both of your parents) of one or several of these genes collectively
increase vulnerability to autoimmune disease. What is inherited is not a specific gene that causes a
specific defect that results in disease (at least in the vast majority of cases). Instead, what is inherited
is a collection of genes that must interact with the environment before autoimmune disease develops.
      There is a dose effect of genes. Specifically, the more “autoimmune genes” you inherit, the more
susceptible you are to developing an autoimmune disease, regardless of environmental triggers. If you
inherit very few autoimmune genes, then environmental factors—everything from infections to
chemical exposure to diet to stress—become more important because they will determine whether or
not you develop an autoimmune disease.
      Genetic susceptibility is the reason autoimmune disease tends to run in families. But family
members don’t necessarily suffer from the same autoimmune diseases, because while genes cause
susceptibility to developing a disease, they are not the cause of autoimmune disease itself. Rather,
autoimmune disease is a noxious collaboration between genetics and the environment.
      An entire book could be written about specific gene mutations and their roles in autoimmune
disease. In fact, an entire library could be filled with how much we don’t know about which genes
contribute to susceptibility to which autoimmune diseases. But to give you a glimmer of the vastness
of this world, I am going to highlight a few known autoimmune gene mutations (the general term for an
alteration in the DNA sequence of a specific gene) or variants (when a certain alteration of a gene is
inherited and found in more than 1 percent of the population) to illustrate the wide range of ways they
can increase susceptibility to autoimmune disease.

Mutations in RAG-1 and RAG-2 genes.B cells are tested for reactivity to self (autoreactivity) in
the bone marrow before being released into the circulation. Some B cells that fail this test (because
their receptors recognize self) may have their receptors modified through a process called receptor
editing and then be retested. If receptor editing fails, those B cells die. This process is controlled by
the recombination activating gene (RAG). Defects in RAG (there are two types: RAG-1 and RAG-2)
mean that receptor editing won’t work (which means those cells die). This has been implicated in
severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).

Mutations in the FoxP3 gene. Naturally occurring regulatory T cells can be distinguished from other
T cells by the presence of an intracellular molecule called FoxP3. Mutations of the FoxP3 gene can
prevent regulatory T cell development, causing the fatal, but rare, immunodysregulation
polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome (IPEX).




Jolaine’s Family History of Autoimmune Disease (and Related
Conditions)




Autoimmune illness is very prevalent in my immediate family. Including my parents, we are a family
of seven. My mom has iritis, arthritis, osteoporosis, macular degeneration, and ankylosing
spondylitis. She has also had her gallbladder removed. My dad had a massive heart attack in his
forties and was actually pronounced dead for twelve minutes! He also has high cholesterol, colon
cancer, skin cancer, high blood pressure, chronic migraine headaches, frequent vertigo, had his
gallbladder removed, and has had walking pneumonia for several years. My oldest sister has severe
Crohn’s disease, which comes with flares of arthritis and iritis. This year she had her entire large
intestine removed. She also has had her gallbladder removed. My brother has seemed to escape an
autoimmune disorder so far. He does have high blood pressure, was born with one kidney, and
recently had a kidney stone attack. My next oldest sister is the lucky one: she has had no health issues!
Then there is myself. I have ankylosing spondylitis, hypothyroidism, IBS, and migraines, and have had
osteopenia and osteoporosis since I was in my thirties. My youngest sister has multiple sclerosis.
      I recently began seeing a new doctor, who after reading my file and family history kinda laughed
and said, “Girl, you need new family genes!”




Mutations in the gene for sialic acid acetylesterase (SIAE). Sialic acid acetylesterase is an
enzyme that decreases B cell receptor signaling and is required for immune tolerance (the process by
which the immune system “tolerates” and chooses not to attack an antigen). Without the inhibiting
action of SIAE, B cells that produce autoantibodies are not suppressed and continue to release
autoantibodies into the body. One study showed that mutations in SIAE are present in 2 percent of
those with autoimmune disease (more so in those with rheumatoid arthritis and type 1 diabetes).
Although not necessary for autoimmune disease, mutations in SIAE greatly increase risk.

Mutations in the Trex1 gene. The enzyme 3' repair exonuclease 1 (Trex1) appears to have a
proofreading function for DNA synthesis. It is also an essential component in what is called the
interferon-stimulatory response to detected viral DNA (basically the stimulation of cytokine release)
and suppresses the antiviral response. Mutations in the human Trex1 gene can cause Aicardi-
Goutières syndrome (AGS) and chilblain lupus and may be involved in many other autoimmune
diseases.

Mutations in the PTPN22 gene. This gene encodes an enzyme found predominantly in lymphoid
tissues, called protein tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 22 (lymphoid), or PTPN22. PTPN22
affects the responsiveness of T and B cell receptors, and certain mutations in PTPN22 are associated
with increased risks of autoimmune diseases. In particular, the R620W mutation has been strongly
associated with many autoimmune disorders, including type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic
lupus erythematosus, vitiligo, and Graves’ disease.

Mutations      in the        gene     for methylenetetrahydrofolate          reductase    (MTHFR).
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the methyl cycle (meaning that how
quickly it works determines how quickly the whole cycle works). The methyl cycle is the process by
which the body recycles methyl groups, which are used to control the activity of a huge variety of
proteins through the post-translational modification methylation (see here). Some extremely important
hormones, such as cortisol and melatonin (both discussed in more detail in chapter 3), and some
extremely important neurotransmitters, such as epinephrine and serotonin, are controlled through
methylation. Defects in MTHFR activity, as occurs in those with the C667T variant of the gene for
MTHFR, result in the buildup of homocysteine in the body, a toxic nonprotein amino acid, which can
contribute to a variety of ailments, including cardiovascular disease, renal disease,
neurodegenerative disease, osteoporosis, and cancer. Elevated homocysteine has been associated
with increased risk for many autoimmune diseases, including diabetes, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis,
Graves’ disease, rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, Alzheimer’s disease (suspected to be an autoimmune
disease), and schizophrenia (suspected to be an autoimmune disease).

Mutations in the HLA-B gene. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is the gene that encodes the proteins
for the major histocompatibility complex (MHC, used interchangeably with HLA in humans;see
here). A specific variant of the HLA-B gene, called HLA-B27 (subtypes B*2701-2759), has been
associated with a variety of autoimmune diseases, including ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis
(Reiter’s syndrome), seronegative spondyloarthropathy, certain eye disorders (acute anterior uveitis
and iritis), psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel diseases (including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative
colitis), and ulcerative colitis–associated spondyloarthritis. Although the details are a mystery, this
particular gene variant appears to affect antigen presentation by the MHC to T cells. Approximately 8
percent of Caucasians, 4 percent of North Africans, 2–9 percent of Chinese, and 0.1–0.5 percent of
Japanese possess the gene variant HLA-B27. Other variants of this gene are strongly associated with
celiac disease: more than 90 percent of those with celiac disease have one of the variants of HLA
known as DQ2 and DQ8.

Some of these gene mutations and variants are common, and some are very rare. There are probably
dozens, if not hundreds, of other as-yet-unidentified gene mutations that also dramatically increase the
risk of developing an autoimmune disease. But it is important to emphasize that, although having one
or more of these genes may increase your risk of a specific autoimmune disease, having “autoimmune
genes” does not mean that you will develop a specific autoimmune disease—or any autoimmune
disease at all.

So How Important Are Genes?

While autoimmune disease runs in families because the genes that make us susceptible to it are
inherited, genes account for only about one-third of that susceptibility; the other two-thirds comes
from—yes, I’m going to repeat myself, because that’s the point of this book—the environment, diet,
and lifestyle.




Is It Worth Being Tested for Autoimmune Genes?




In most cases, the results will not impact diagnosis or treatment. However, if specific genetic
susceptibility can be established (by testing positive for a variant of a gene known to be correlated
with autoimmune disease), family members can be tested for the presence of the gene, which may
influence how proactive they are in terms of their diets and lifestyles. Furthermore, some gene
mutations may indicate the need for specific supplementation that may be helpful in managing
autoimmune diseases. For example, those with the C667T variant of the MTHFR gene can benefit
from additional vitamins B6 and B12 (either through foods rich in B vitamins or targeted
supplementation) to support the methyl cycle.




Environmental Triggers

Some environmental triggers relate to the formation of autoantibodies (see here). For example, certain
infections are more likely to result in the formation of autoantibodies because of similarities between
proteins in those viruses, bacteria, or parasites and proteins in the human body. Other environmental
triggers relate to the regulation of the adaptive immune system. For example, vitamin D deficiency has
been shown to directly impact the numbers of regulatory T cells produced by the body (see here).
When an insufficient number of regulatory T cells are produced, the immune system is unable to
suppress autoimmunity. Environmental triggers also play a role in putting the immune system on the
attack. For example, antibodies known to cause systemic lupus erythematosus have been detected in
patients with silicone implants, but they disappeared once the implant (i.e., the trigger) was removed.
     Some environmental triggers can be addressed, such as micronutrient deficiencies (whether or
not they are a result of diet and lifestyle) or constant chemical exposure. However, with the vast
majority of environmental triggers, once you have been exposed, the damage is done (as in the case of
infection).

Infections

There is a strong link between autoimmune disease and infection, although whether infection is a
contributor to all autoimmune diseases remains unknown. It’s important to understand the distinction
between infection contributing to the development of autoimmune disease and causing it. Unlike
communicable diseases like the flu, chicken pox, and polio, autoimmune diseases are not caused by
infectious organisms (viruses, bacteria, fungi, or parasites). Instead, being infected by certain
pathogens simply increases your chance of developing specific autoimmune diseases.
     The mechanism seems to be one of autoantibody formation. Certain viruses, bacteria, fungi, and
parasites increase the likelihood of antibodies that also recognize self to be formed. Even more
specifically, certain infections are linked to increased risk of only a subset of autoimmune diseases,
probably because proteins in those microorganisms more closely resemble specific proteins in our
bodies.
     Although I could talk endlessly on the subject, I have chosen to highlight just a few known
correlations between specific infections and particular autoimmune diseases, in part to emphasize
how impossible it is to control this factor in autoimmune disease development.

Borrelia. Borrelia are spirochete bacteria typically transmitted by lice and ticks. (Lyme disease is
caused by borrelia.) Rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, schizophrenia (suspected to be an autoimmune
disease), and dementia (also suspected to be an autoimmune disease) are all associated with Borrelia
infections.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae. This bacterium commonly causes pharyngitis, bronchitis, and atypical
pneumonia (walking pneumonia). It is associated with increased risk of arthritis, myocarditis,
Guillain-Barré syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease (a suspected autoimmune disease), chronic fatigue
syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (a suspected autoimmune disease), multiple
sclerosis, and Tourette syndrome.

Enterovirus. Enteroviruses (viruses of the gastrointestinal tract) are responsible for a wide range of
diseases, from the common cold to hand, foot, and mouth disease; acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis;
aseptic meningitis; and polio. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (suspected to be an autoimmune disease),
chronic fatigue syndrome (suspected to be an autoimmune disease), type 1 diabetes, Guillain-Barré
syndrome, and schizophrenia (suspected to be an autoimmune disease) are all associated with
Enterovirus infections.

Giardia lamblia. Perhaps best known as the organism responsible for “beaver fever” or
“backpacker’s diarrhea” because of its proliferation in streams and rivers, Giardia lamblia can
completely destroy the surface of the gut mucosal barrier, although not always with overt symptoms.
Infestation with this parasite is associated with neurological autoimmune diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (suspected autoimmune disease), and Parkinson’s disease
(suspected autoimmune disease), but also chronic fatigue syndrome, arthritis, and uveitis.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). H. pylori is a bacteria found in the upper gastrointestinal tracts of
more than half the people in the world (more in developing nations). While 80 percent of those
infected are asymptomatic, H. pylori can cause chronic gastritis, the symptoms of which include
nonulcer dyspepsia, stomach pains, nausea, bloating, belching, and sometimes vomiting or black
stool. It is known to be responsible for stomach ulcers and increased risk of stomach cancer. It is also
strongly correlated with immune thrombocytopenia, psoriasis, and sarcoidosis.

Herpesvirus. Herpes is actually a very large family of viruses, several of which are strongly linked
to autoimmune disease. For example, Guillain-Barré syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus are
associated with infections from viruses in the Cytomegalovirus genus. Although most people infected
are completely asymptomatic, some experience symptoms similar to mononucleosis (sore throat,
swollen glands, prolonged fever, and mild hepatitis). However, cytomegaloviral infections remain
latent in the body and may cause serious disease should you become immunocompromised later in
life. An estimated 40 percent of adults worldwide have had cytomegaloviral infections.
      Epstein-Barr virus is a member of the Herpesvirus family. It is responsible for infectious
mononucleosis (mono or glandular fever). Infection with Epstein-Barr is associated with a higher
risk of dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, and
multiple sclerosis.
      Human herpesvirus 6 is another type of Herpesvirus, with infections typically presenting as a
combination of rash and fever. (The childhood disease roseola is an example.) A strong link between
Human herpesvirus 6 and multiple sclerosis has been observed, and there is an increased risk of
chronic fatigue syndrome associated with Human herpesvirus 6 infection.
Norovirus. Noroviruses are the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu; Norwalk
virus is probably the best-known virus in this genus). Infection is characterized by nausea, forceful
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. In addition, lethargy, weakness, muscle aches, headache,
coughs, and low-grade fever may occur. Crohn’s disease is associated with Norovirus infection. In
fact, animal studies replicate Crohn’s disease using the combination of Norovirus, a specific
susceptibility gene (ATG16L1), and chemical toxic damage to the gut.

Parvovirus B19. This virus causes a childhood rash called fifth disease (also known as slapped
cheek syndrome). Parvovirus B19 also causes a form of acute arthritis. Whether acute arthritis
directly leads to the development of rheumatoid arthritis remains controversial. However, there does
seem to be a correlation between parvovirus B19 and rheumatoid arthritis, as well as both systemic
lupus erythematosus and vasculitis.

Streptococcus. Ever had a strep throat? Yes, even the simple Streptococcus bacteria can increase
your risk of autoimmune disease, specifically Tourette syndrome.

Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii). This parasite, which is present in birds and cats, is the reason
pregnant women are not supposed to scoop kitty litter. At least 40 percent and as much as 70 percent
of humans in Western countries are infected with toxoplasmosis, which is completely asymptomatic
unless you are immunocompromised or become infected while pregnant. (There is no risk to the fetus
if you are infected with Toxoplasma gondii before becoming pregnant, but getting infected during
gestation can cause a variety of serious health problems for the baby.) This parasite, while typically
considered completely benign, is associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease (a suspected
autoimmune disease), Parkinson’s disease (a suspected autoimmune disease), Tourette syndrome,
antiphospholipid syndrome, systemic sclerosis, and inflammatory bowel diseases.
     In most cases, simply being infected by these microorganisms at some point in your life is
enough for them to contribute to the development of autoimmune disease. The list of these extremely
common infections, many of which are considered childhood “rite of passage” diseases, is quite long.
However, these infections simply present the opportunity for autoantibody formation, which, by itself,
does not cause autoimmune disease.

Persistent Infections

Persistent infections are another concern because they don’t present symptoms. They may be latent
infections, in which the invading microorganism is dormant, or slow infections, in which the invading
microorganism reproduces slowly (and the numbers are so low that they don’t cause symptoms).
These “silent” infections may be viral, bacterial, fungal, or parasitical. And they may be significant
contributors to autoimmune disease. This is a little different than infections that simply contribute to
autoantibody formation: latent infections may directly impact the adaptive immune system on an
ongoing basis.
     Three of the most common persistent infections that contribute to autoimmune disease are:

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). H. pylori is frequently accused of contributing to the development
and progression of autoimmune disease (and is also one of the best-understood persistent infections).
As mentioned in the previous section, H. pylori is a bacterium found in the upper gastrointestinal tract
of approximately 50 percent of the population and is known to cause stomach ulcers in susceptible
individuals. It also modulates the adaptive immune system through a very complex interaction. In fact,
the interaction is so complex that acquiring H. pylori early in life prevents immune and autoimmune
diseases. By contrast, acquiring H. pylori as an adult (which is more common in Western countries)
increases the risk of immune dysfunction.
      When H. pylori is eaten (phagocytosed) by dendritic cells, it interacts with a receptor in the cell
membrane of those cells that affect cytokine production. Recall that the cytokine environment
influences which specific type of helper T cell a naïve T cell will become. H. pylori is actually able
to flip a switch in dendritic cells to encourage either Th1 formation or Th2 formation, but usually the
former. H. pylori further interacts with the immune system by influencing which cytokines are
produced by macrophages, B cells, and T cells. These cytokines damage the cells that line the
stomach and the upper part of the small intestine and stimulate the recruitment of inflammatory cells,
such as neutrophils. Furthermore, they induce changes in gastric-acid secretion by the cells that line
the stomach and alter the secretion of mucus by the cells that line the small intestine. By blocking
production of important cytokines by T cells, H. pylori is able to thwart the adaptive immune system,
thereby ensuring its own survival—and causing chronic gastritis (inflammation of the stomach and
upper digestive tract) at the same time.
      Chronic inflammation in the gut increases intestinal permeability (i.e., leaky gut), which
contributes not only to autoimmune disease but also to a truly staggering variety of chronic illnesses.
(The role of leaky gut in autoimmune disease will be discussed shortly.)
      A s H. pylori infection persists, the ratio of Th1 to Th2 cells becomes more and more
imbalanced. Very importantly, the stimulation of the adaptive immune system and the creation of Th1
or Th2 dominance also contributes to autoimmune disease in susceptible individuals. H. pylori can
actually switch back and forth between stimulating Th1 or Th2 formation, so controlling these cell
populations becomes a moving target (see here). It appears that the specific susceptibility genes of the
infected person determine which H. pylori “chooses” to stimulate more often and the frequency of
switching between the two (if it occurs at all).

Toxoplasmosis gondii (T. gondii). A recent study evaluated the percentage of healthy individuals
and the percentage of individuals suffering from any of eleven autoimmune diseases for the presence
of antibodies against Toxoplasmosis gondii (indicating current infection). While only 29 percent of
healthy individuals had the antibodies, 42 percent of those with autoimmune disease did. Upon initial
infection with T. gondii, macrophages and natural killer cells are activated, thereby stimulating
inflammation. Damage to the intestinal lining allows bacteria from the gut to enter the body, which
further stimulates the immune system to mount an attack. Under normal conditions, T. gondii induces a
potent Th1 response. These Th1 cells then secrete cytokines, which force the parasite into a dormant
phase (but do not eradicate the infection). In those susceptible to autoimmune disease, the
inflammatory and immune responses continue to grow, rather than finding equilibrium. The exact
mechanism by which this happens and the role the gut microflora play (see here) remain unknown. T.
gondii also decreases the ability of macrophages and dendritic cells to produce certain cytokines
(which, in part, drives the Th1 response). This reduces the body’s ability to prevent bacteria from
exiting through the intestine, which then causes chronic secondary inflammation and immune
activation.
Cell wall–deficient bacteria. Two recent studies, while performed on only a small number of
patients, showed that a large percentage of patients with sarcoidosis improved when treated with the
antibiotic tetracycline. The use of antibiotics was motivated by other studies that found cell wall–
deficient bacteria (a class of antibiotic-resistant bacteria that can remain latent or slow-growing
within human cells for extended periods) in multiple cell types, including the phagocytes of
sarcoidosis patients. These bacteria may contribute to autoimmune disease by releasing bacterial
toxins (called endotoxins) into the phagocytes as the bacteria complete their normal life cycle and
die. This dump of toxins causes the release of cytokines that stimulates Th1 cells. Cell wall–deficient
bacteria have also been found in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
      Persistent infection may or may not be a factor in your autoimmune disease. Working with a
health care practitioner to treat persistent infections either naturally or pharmaceutically is an
important aspect of managing autoimmune disease. However, for most people, implementing diet and
lifestyle changes will allow their bodies to deal with these infections without the need for medical
intervention. On the flip side, for some, simply accurately diagnosing and treating a latent infection
will cause a complete reversal of the autoimmune disease, without the immediate need for diet or
lifestyle changes. But it is important for these people to keep in mind that their bodies are still highly
susceptible to relapse and that the recommendations presented in The Paleo Approach will be their
most effective course of action for preventing their autoimmune disease from returning or a new
autoimmune disease from developing.
      Some latent infections (parasites in particular) appear to stymie many people in the management
of their autoimmune disease, even after fully adopting the recommendations in The Paleo Approach.
This means that these infections cannot be outwitted by diet and lifestyle modifications alone. While
this is addressed more in chapter 8, it is important to mention now that diet and lifestyle
modifications will need to be implemented in conjunction with treatment for infections in order to see
substantial results.

Exposure to Toxins, Pollutants, Chemicals, and Drugs

A variety of environmental toxins and pollutants, workplace hazards, and other forms of chemical
exposure have been linked to autoimmune disease.
      Depending on the toxin, the level of exposure, and the autoimmune disease, removing the
offending chemical from the environment may or may not provide a benefit. In some cases, removing
that trigger to autoimmune disease will enable a full recovery to take place. In other cases, the
damage has been done, and removing the harmful substance will not promote healing. (That doesn’t
mean you can’t recover; it just means that diet and lifestyle are even more important.)
      These triggers span the full gamut of both human-made and natural substances. I have chosen to
highlight some of the best-understood ones.
Heavy metals. Mercury, cadmium, lead, aluminum, and gold are among the twenty-three metals
classified as “heavy metals.” They are not toxic in small quantities (and, in fact, many are essential to
life), but high levels can be poisonous and trigger autoimmune disease. Heavy metal toxicity is
strongly linked to autoimmune disease. In some cases, chelation therapy (a process by which heavy
metals are filtered out of the blood) has been known to completely reverse autoimmune disease.
However, the relationship between heavy metals and autoimmune disease is not always clear. For
example, while gold may possibly be used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, it could cause autoimmune
diseases of the kidney. A test known as a heavy metal screen (several types are available) can
determine whether heavy metal toxicity is a factor in your autoimmune disease.




Prescription drugs. There are thirty-eight drugs linked to lupus in people with a genetic
susceptibility to the disease. (This is called drug-induced lupus erythematosus, as opposed to
systemic lupus erythematosus, but the diseases are basically the same.) The three drugs that cause the
most cases are hydralazine (a blood-pressure medication), procainamide (used to treat cardiac
arrhythmias), and isoniazid (an antibiotic used to treat tuberculosis). In these cases, stopping the
medication early enough can completely reverse the disease. However, many people will continue to
experience symptoms or suffer a recurrence of lupus or another autoimmune disease later in life
(probably because of their genetic predisposition to autoimmune disease).
Pristane. Pristane (more technically called tetramethylpentadecane) is a naturally occurring
hydrocarbon found in petroleum that is commonly used as a lubricant, an immunologic adjuvant, and
an anticorrosion agent. It is also a common chemical used in biomedical research labs. Exposure to
pristane is known to dramatically increase risk of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus. In fact, residents of Hobbs County, New Mexico, who were living in homes built over
a former oil-waste pit were exposed to high levels of pristane and mercury and were found to have a
ten times greater risk of developing arthritis and an estimated thirty to one hundred times greater risk
of developing lupus than other Americans. (In the case of Hobbs County, the concurrent exposure to
mercury made the situation even worse.)




Silica dust. An occupational hazard for workers in mining, stone cutting, quarrying, blasting, road and
building construction, and farming, exposure to silica dust has been linked to systemic sclerosis. For
example, mine workers exposed to silica dust are approximately twenty-four times more likely to
develop the disease. Systemic sclerosis is also known to be triggered by exposure to solvents (which
are derived from crude oil), such as benzene, trichloroethylene (an industrial metal cleaner), and
perchloroethylene (used in dry-cleaning).
Smoking. It is common knowledge that smoking and good health do not go hand in hand. However,
suffering from an autoimmune disease should give you extra incentive to quit. Smoking is a factor in
the development of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis and may be an important trigger in other
autoimmune diseases as well. In fact, smoking is considered to be directly responsible for more than
a third of the cases of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis (and 55 percent of rheumatoid arthritis cases
in people with the DRB1 SE variant of the HLA gene). And smokers who have arthritis are less likely
to respond to treatment. If you are struggling with an autoimmune disease and you’re still smoking, I
cannot urge you in strong enough terms to quit.




Ultraviolet radiation. Ultraviolet radiation is the type of sunlight that our bodies need in order to
convert cholesterol into vitamin D. Sun exposure is a necessary and critical aspect of health (see
here). And when it comes to multiple sclerosis, the less sun exposure you have, the more likely you
are to get the disease: the lack of adequate sun exposure is the environmental trigger. It is also
important to note that this is true regardless of vitamin D production (although low levels of vitamin
D also contribute to autoimmune diseases; see here), which reflects the other benefits of sun
exposure. However, more sun is not better: excessive UV exposure increases the risk of developing
dermatomyositis (especially compared with other forms of myositis).
     Multiple-chemical sensitivity (MCS) is another form of toxic exposure worth mentioning. It is
characterized by severe sensitivity or allergylike reactions to many pollutants, including solvents;
volatile organic compounds (VOCs); perfumes; gasoline and diesel; smoke; chemicals in skincare
products, soaps, shampoos, and household cleaners; and even pollen, dust mites, and pet dander.
Controversy rages over whether MCS is a bona fide condition because of the huge variability in both
symptoms and sensitivities from patient to patient and because no root cause for this condition has
been identified.
     MCS may be a presentation of early autoimmune disease or may simply be a related or
secondary condition. There does, however, seem to be a correlation between chemical sensitivity and
autoimmune disease, although in most cases it’s not clear which comes first. Many people find that
ridding their environment of chemicals—including plastics for food storage—improves their comfort
and healing. Natural and environmentally friendly products are readily available; you can even find
recipes for nontoxic beauty and cleaning products online.

Hormones

As mentioned in the introduction, autoimmune disease is far more prevalent in women than in men.
Conservative estimates indicate that 78 percent of those affected by autoimmune diseases are women,
which probably reflects the impact of certain hormones (sex hormones in particular). Hormones like
estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone and other androgens play an important role not just in
regulating reproductive functions but also in metabolism and immune function. Although both men and
women have these hormones, women have higher levels of estrogen, the key player. Furthermore,
women are far more likely to intentionally manipulate their hormone levels (through oral
contraceptives, fertility treatments, or hormone replacement therapy), but also appear to be more
sensitive to hormone changes caused by estrogen-mimicking compounds in both our diet and our
environment.




What Are Hormones?
Hormones are chemical messengers in contact with virtually every cell in your body. They respond to
the demands of your cells and to changes in your body’s chemistry to ensure that your cells get
everything they need to stay healthy. There are over fifty hormones, produced by the various glands of
the endocrine system, circulating throughout the body, each one responsible for sending a different
kind of signal. The hormones relevant to our discussion include:


     The sex hormones estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone
     The metabolic and hunger hormones insulin and glucagon (see here)
     The adiposity (fat) and hunger hormone leptin (see here)
     The hunger hormone ghrelin (see here)
     The stress hormone cortisol (see here)
     The sleep hormone melatonin (see here)
     The love hormone oxytocin (see here)




     Sex hormones influence the immune system in a complex manner. For example, estrogen may be
proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory, depending on the tissue, the stimulus for inflammation, and
what type of inflammation or immune response is occurring, among other factors. Estrogen stimulates
some components of the immune system (like B cell activity and certain cytokines) while inhibiting
others (like Th1 cell activity and other cytokines). In fact, it appears to have an effect on virtually
every component of the immune system. Furthermore, other hormones, such as androgens and
progesterone, counteract some of the effects of estrogen, making this system both extremely
complicated to understand and extremely susceptible to being thrown out of balance by external
factors. This is why hormones appear to be the trigger of autoimmune disease in some cases while in
others hormone therapy appears to be very beneficial.
     It is not as simple as getting hormone levels into the happy-medium range. Hormone levels go up
and down, both with the female menstrual cycle and with normal circadian rhythms. (Circadian
rhythms are the cycling of hormones that help your body know whether it’s day or night; see here.)
The system is incredibly dynamic, and the timing of hormone changes is just as important as the levels
themselves.
     In some cases, out-of-whack hormones may be a symptom of autoimmune disease rather than a
trigger. Many of the lifestyle factors that contribute to autoimmune disease (discussed in more detail
in chapter 3) also affect estrogen levels: chronic stress and disruption of circadian rhythms (for
example, by drugs like caffeine and sleeping pills, by staying up late to watch TV, or by remaining
indoors all day). Inflammatory cytokines, such as those produced during autoimmune disease, can
also affect estrogen, progesterone, and androgens. Even the corticosteroid drugs used to treat some
autoimmune diseases can have profound effects on estrogen levels.

Hormones Produced by the Body. The complex interplay between hormones and autoimmune
disease is only beginning to be understood. Some autoimmune diseases—schizophrenia (a suspected
autoimmune disease), type 1 diabetes, nephritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and Still’s disease—are
more likely to manifest during puberty. Others—including Addison’s disease, celiac disease, and
Crohn’s disease—will actually delay puberty. Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and rheumatoid arthritis cycle in terms of intensity of symptoms during the month in
response to changing levels of sex hormones in women. Symptoms of some autoimmune diseases,
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, subside during menopause. Pregnancy and the use of oral
contraceptives are known to cause many autoimmune diseases to go into remission, but many others to
flare.

Synthetic-Hormone Drugs. Fertility hormones, such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH),
have been linked to autoimmune thyroid disorders. Stopping hormone therapy does not cause
immediate remission; the disease typically persists for two or more years afterward. Fertility
treatments are also linked to multiple sclerosis. It is important to note that since infertility is one
possible symptom of autoimmune disease, it is possible that the autoimmune disease was present
before fertility drugs were taken, but that the disease flared as a result of hormone manipulation. Only
a handful of studies have evaluated the effect of oral contraceptives on autoimmune disease risk, with
mixed results. For example, extended use of oral contraceptives increases the risk of developing
Crohn’s disease and systemic lupus erythematosus but decreases the risk of developing rheumatoid
arthritis.
What About Pregnancy?




Pregnancy tends to bring one of two extremes when it comes to autoimmune disease—remission or
flare. This is caused by changes in hormones and the immune system that occur during pregnancy.
While many people think the immune system is suppressed during pregnancy, this isn’t strictly true:
some aspects of the immune system are suppressed, but others are stimulated. It’s much more of a
shift in operating system: different cell types and humoral mediators (mediators are molecules that
control or activate functions in other cells, acting like a signal or a directive; for example, cytokines
and antibodies) become the dominant protectors. For example, natural killer cells (see here) increase.
Perhaps even more important for those with autoimmune diseases, Th1 cells are suppressed and Th2
cells tend to surge.
      In some cases, autoimmune diseases go into complete remission while women are pregnant. In
other cases, pregnant women experience worsening of their autoimmune diseases. It is important to
note that many women whose autoimmune diseases abate during pregnancy will suffer from a flare
either upon the birth of the baby (within the first few weeks postpartum, when their hormones and
immune system revert to “normal”) or upon weaning the child (when another hormone shift takes
place). Conversely, women who experience increased symptoms during pregnancy will often see a
reduction in their symptoms postpartum.
      Recommendations specific to pregnant and lactating women are discussed see here and here.




Environmental Estrogens. Environmental estrogens are estrogens or estrogen-mimicking compounds
found everywhere in our environment. Phytoestrogens occur naturally in plants such as flaxseed, soy,
and other legumes. Mycoestrogens are common food contaminants produced by molds and other fungi
(and are very common in alfalfa). Meat, eggs, and dairy products from animals treated with hormones
may contain high concentrations of estrogens. Xenoestrogens are a class of synthetic estrogens found
in industrial products, such as pesticides, plastics, and detergents. Metalloestrogens are found in
heavy metals. All these environmental estrogens are immunotoxic (toxic to the immune system) in
large amounts. While the effect of these substances on human health in general is still controversial
and remains greatly understudied, there is an established correlation between exposure to some
environmental estrogens and the development of autoimmune disease.
     You can limit your exposure to environmental estrogens by:

          Avoiding the foods that are the highest in phytoestrogens, including flaxseed, soy, whole
          grains, corn, and meat or eggs from animals treated with hormones. Other (lesser) sources
          of phytoestrogens include all nuts and seeds (especially sesame seeds, pistachios,
          sunflower seeds, and chestnuts and, to a lesser degree, almonds, walnuts, cashews, and
          hazelnuts) and all legumes (especially lentils, navy beans, kidney beans, pinto beans, and
          fava beans, but also chickpeas and split green and yellow peas). Alfalfa sprouts tend to be
          high in mycoestrogens because of contamination from a fungus that commonly grows on
          them. (Many vegetables and fruits contain low, but not zero, levels of phytoestrogens as
          well, including winter squash, green beans, collard greens, broccoli, cabbage, and dried
          prunes. It is not necessary for most people to avoid these foods, although those with known
          reproductive hormone imbalances would benefit from consuming them in moderation and
          only occasionally.)
          Reducing the use of plastic containers for food storage (and never using plastic containers
          to heat food as in microwave cooking).
          Eating organically grown produce and organic, pasture-raised meat.
          Evaluating the estrogen-mimicking chemicals that may be present in your household
          cleaning products, laundry detergents, and cosmetics.


     So what do you do if you are a woman suffering from an autoimmune disease and taking oral
contraceptives or undergoing hormone replacement therapy? It is hard to give a definitive answer, but
it is very likely that the recommendations in The Paleo Approach will help you experience
substantial improvements in your health, whether you discontinue taking synthetic hormones or not.
However, if your symptoms aren’t alleviated after implementing the diet and lifestyle changes I
recommend, you should take a second look at these triggers. In the case of oral contraceptives or
other hormone-based contraceptives, weighing the risks associated with switching to another method
of birth control versus how much these contraceptives may be exacerbating your autoimmune disease
is a personal decision—only you can make it. In the case of hormones taken for other therapeutic
reasons, it may be a case of finding another drug or altering the dose rather than discontinuing the
treatment altogether. For many women, it may be beneficial to get hormone testing done throughout the
menstrual cycle to identify when specific hormones are being expressed at abnormal levels: this
information will enable you to work with your health care practitioner to better normalize both your
hormone levels and how the levels naturally cycle over time.

Diet and Lifestyle

There is such a thing as the “hygiene hypothesis,” which suggests that being too clean might contribute
to autoimmune disease. This idea originates with World Health Organization epidemiological data
indicating that some autoimmune diseases (such as type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis) that are
extremely rare in most rural or traditional African and Asian populations are more prevalent in these
same people when they migrate to a modern setting.
     There is more to moving into the developed world than hand sanitizer and disinfecting wipes.
There are packaged foods; processed foods; high-fructose corn syrup; genetically modified crops;
meat from animals fed food they weren’t meant to consume and injected with antibiotics to
compensate for their poor living conditions; and produce grown in nutrient-poor soil, sprayed with
chemicals, and harvested before it is ripe so it can be transported thousands of miles to your local
grocery store. There are antibiotics, aspirin, and antacids. There is coffee to perk you up in the
morning and sleeping pills to help you sleep at night. Noise and light pollution, traffic, alarm clocks,
deadlines, bills, lightbulbs, the Internet, and late-night TV all come with the territory. Of course,
when used conscientiously, some of this technology can improve our quality of life, but some of it
contributes to stress, disrupted circadian rhythms, and inflammation. Which is all to say that the
increase in autoimmune disease in, say, big cities is obviously due to more than the fact that our
environments are deficient in the beneficial microorganisms commonly found in rural settings.




Helminth Therapy?
One of the supporting factors for the hygiene hypothesis is the discovery that some parasites are
actually effective treatments against some autoimmune diseases. (But don’t worry—you don’t need to
seek out parasite infections to heal your body and reverse your autoimmune disease!) These parasites,
together with the commensal bacteria and fungi that live in our guts and other parts of our bodies (see
here), are understood to have evolved with humans to enjoy a mutually beneficial relationship. This is
an update on the hygiene hypothesis called “the old friends hypothesis,” which states that the absence
of exposure to beneficial organisms (like probiotic bacteria, but also some parasites) that normally
modulate our immune systems (especially early in life) is at least in part to blame for the rise in
autoimmune- and immune-related conditions.




     There is certainly a benefit to playing in the dirt and to eating unwashed, locally grown organic
produce (more on this in chapters 5 and 6). However, my assertion is not that hand sanitizer and
disinfecting wipes contribute to autoimmune disease, but rather that the diet and lifestyle of Western
culture and city life are the culprits. Specific diet and lifestyle factors that contribute to autoimmune
disease are discussed in detail in chapters 2 and 3, respectively.
For more information about the complicated roles that exposure to organisms in our
environment have on human health, check out An Epidemic of Absence: A New Way of
Understanding Allergies and Autoimmune Diseases, by Moises Velasquez-Manoff.
What Do Autoimmune Diseases Have in Common?

You may be starting to think that just about anything can trigger an autoimmune disease if you have
susceptibility genes. And while there is certainly an element of bad luck involved, there are some
factors that seem to be so prevalent that they probably figure in all autoimmune diseases. By looking
at these common factors, we can identify the diet and lifestyle changes necessary to manage
autoimmune disease.
      Although research focusing on the commonalities among autoimmune diseases is still in its
infancy, the medical literature as a whole presents some very striking patterns. The most auspicious is
that a “leaky gut” (more technically, “increased intestinal permeability”) is a necessary precursor to
autoimmune disease. What does that mean? In order to develop autoimmune disease, you must first
have a genetic predisposition to it, you must then be exposed to a trigger, and you must have a leaky
gut. While a variety of genes may increase susceptibility to autoimmune disease, and there are just as
many potential environmental triggers, a leaky gut is the least common denominator among
autoimmune diseases.
      A leaky gut is caused by diet and lifestyle factors. It can be healed by addressing those factors,
and by healing a leaky gut you can reverse autoimmune disease!

          “In addition to genetic predisposition and exposure to triggering nonself-antigens, the
          loss of the protective function of mucosal barriers that interact with the environment
          (mainly the gastrointestinal and lung mucosa) is necessary for autoimmunity to
          develop.”
          —ALESSIO FASANO,
          “Leaky Gut and Autoimmune Diseases,”
          Clinical Review of Allergy Immunology 42 (February 2012): 71–78.




Isn’t Leaky Gut Just the Latest Catchphrase?
While the term leaky gut is becoming popular in some circles, it is also lumped into a category with
“divining allergies” and “balancing chakras” by some medical professionals. However, the body of
scientific literature showing that increased intestinal permeability is inextricably linked to diverse
diseases is convincing. Even though there is no difference between them, you may be taken more
seriously if you say “increased intestinal permeability” instead of “leaky gut.” I use both phrases
interchangeably.




What Is a Leaky Gut?
An enormous proportion of the body’s immune system lies within the tissues surrounding the gut. This
is because the gut is an essential barrier between the outside world and the inside. Yes, inside the gut
is actually outside the body. The entire digestive tract—from where food goes in to where waste
comes out—is basically one continuous tube. The small intestine is where most nutrients are
absorbed into the body, but it’s not an open door (at least it’s not supposed to be): nutrients come in,
and everything else stays out.
      Food must be broken down into its simplest forms in order to cross the lining of the small
intestine. This breaking down is achieved by the combined efforts of acid and digestive enzymes
produced by the cells that line the stomach, bile salts made by the liver and stored in the gallbladder
until needed, additional (and different) digestive enzymes made and secreted into the small intestine
by the pancreas, and even the gut microbiota (the friendly bacteria that live in the gut). Before being
absorbed into the body, proteins must be broken down into amino acids, fats must be broken down
into fatty acids, and carbohydrates must be broken down into monosaccharides (simple sugars). Once
food is broken down into its simplest components, the cells that line the gut transport those
components from inside the gut to inside the body.
      What can’t be digested by our bodies is excreted as waste (along with dead gut bacteria as their
life cycles end). Amazingly, a single layer of highly specialized cells—known as enterocytes—is all
that separates the inside of the body from the outside. These cells have two very specific jobs:
                     To transport the digested nutrients from the “inside the gut” side of the cell
                      to the “outside the gut” side of the cell
                      To keep everything else inside the gut (that is, not let it enter the body)
      Immediately across this barrier are two important parts of the digestive system:
                      The resident immune cells of the gut, whose job is to protect us from
                      pathogens that might find their way across the enterocyte barrier
                      A network of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels that carry the digested
                      nutrients from food to the tissues in our body that need them
      Amino acids, monosaccharides, minerals, and water-soluble vitamins are transported through
the blood, while fatty acids and fat-soluble vitamins are transported through the lymphatic system.
      It’s important to understand just how essential the barrier function of the gut is to human health
because, as previously mentioned, a loss of that function is a critical factor in autoimmune disease.
      The first part of the gut barrier is called the mucus layer. This is exactly what it sounds like: a
layer of thick mucus secreted by what are called goblet cells, which are found at regular intervals
along the gut epithelial layer. This mucus layer forms a physical barrier between the inside of the gut
and the inside of the body. The mucus is held in place by the glycocalyx layer, a layer of sticky
molecules secreted by the enterocytes. The cell membrane of the enterocytes that faces the inside of
the gut is shaped into projections called microvilli (see below). This continuous layer of microvilli is
called the brush border. The enterocytes themselves form the next layer of the barrier. And yet,
because nutrient absorption is one of the two primary functions of this barrier, the barrier is not
impermeable: pathogens and other substances can still get across.
The Digestive System




The digestive system involves multiple organ systems, all of which must work together for optimal
digestion and health. The small intestine is the major site of absorption in the digestive tract. The
cells that line the small intestine—gut epithelial cells, or enterocytes—have a cell membrane shaped
into fingerlike projections called microvilli, which increases the surface area that each individual
cell has available to absorb nutrients (the cell membrane is shaped this way only on the side that
faces the inside of the gut).
The cells are arranged into columns called villi, separated by deep valleys called crypts. This
increases the number of enterocytes needed to create the lining of the gut (again, increasing surface
area for absorption). The small intestine itself has big wrinkles called plicae circulares. Picture a
pile carpet rolled into a tube and then wrinkled along the length of the tube. Even each individual pile
is composed of small fibers that have waves and wrinkles. These structures give the gut its enormous
surface area—approximately as large as a tennis court!


Each villus (or column of enterocytes) has a network of capillaries and fine lymphatic vessels called
lacteals close to its surface. This is where nutrients are absorbed and the resident immune cells of the
gut lie in wait to defend the body against invading pathogens.




      Just inside the enterocyte layer lie the resident immune cells of the gut: predominantly
macrophages, dendritic cells, IgA-secreting B cells, and Th3 lymphocytes. These are the sentries of
the gut barrier, ready to protect the body from attack. The gut is also a lymphoid organ (the largest
lymphoid organ in the body), and the lymphoid tissue within it is collectively referred to as the gut-
associated lymphoid tissue. This tissue houses a huge number of naïve T cells and B cells (as many as
the spleen!), so the adaptive immune system is very close at hand and poised to join any defense
against invading pathogens.
      A leaky gut occurs when either individual or groups of enterocytes are damaged or the proteins
that form the tight bonds between these cells and hold them together as a solid layer are damaged (see
here). When this happens, microscopic holes are formed through which some of the contents of the gut
can leak out into the bloodstream or lymphatic system—and, most important, straight into the waiting
arms of the resident immune cells of the gut. What leaks out isn’t big hunks of food, but a combination
of pathogens: incompletely digested proteins; bacteria or bacterial fragments from those friendly
bacteria that are supposed to stay in your gut; infectious organisms if they’re present in the gut; or a
variety of toxic substances or waste products that would normally be excreted. When these pathogens
leak through those holes, the resident immune cells of the gut recognize them as foreign invaders and
mount a response against them, recruiting more immune cells from the gut-associated lymphoid tissue.
When large quantities of pathogens escape, other parts of the body, especially the liver, also
contribute to the response—revving up bodywide inflammation and sending the immune system into
overdrive. Exactly what and how much leaks out determines the precise nature of this immune
response.




Peyer’s Patches
Peyer’s patches are areas of the small intestine that are designed to allow a more direct interaction
between the immune system and the environment inside the gut. The reason for Peyer’s patches is one
of vigilance: the immune cells within the patch are able to evaluate whether there are pathogens
inside the gut that the body should prepare to defend itself from.
      Peyer’s patches are small, domelike areas of the small intestine, as opposed to the tall villi and
deep crypts of the rest of the intestinal surface. These patches overlie lymphoid tissue where even
more immune cells reside, compared with the rest of the small intestine. Among the cells that line
these patches are M cells, which get their name from the shape of their surface membrane (the side
that faces inside the gut is shaped into microfolds rather than microvilli). The M cells have a thick
glycocalyx layer (which is used by M cells to control the interaction with potential antigens within the
gut) but do not secrete mucus, so there is no thick mucus layer over the Peyer’s patches. This lack of
mucus enables M cells and dendritic cells (which extend arms between M cells and into the gut, the
dendritic cell version of a periscope) to patrol for antigens inside the gut. Should they find an antigen,
the density of immune cells within the patch means that the immune system can be quickly called into
action.



     Some pathogenic substances (like bacterial fragments and toxins) cause generalized
inflammation by triggering the release of inflammatory cytokines (the chemical messengers that
circulate in the blood and tell white blood cells to attack) that recruit the cells of the innate immune
system. Recall that this type of inflammation has no specific target, so any cell in the body can be an
innocent victim. These toxins must typically be filtered by the liver. When the liver is overworked,
the toxins accumulate in the body, and the inflammation spreads and begins to trigger the adaptive
immune system to join in the battle. This type of inflammation can be a major contributor to a variety
of health issues, not just autoimmune disease.
     Other substances (like incompletely digested proteins) stimulate the adaptive immune system,
which responds in a variety of ways, producing ailments such as allergies and autoimmune disease.
An allergy results when B cells secrete IgE antibodies that target a part of a protein that is specific to
the food it originated from: antibodies targeting the casein in milk causes a milk allergy, for example.
A similar immune response occurs when B cells secrete IgA, IgD, IgM, or IgG antibodies. This type
of immune response is technically considered a food intolerance (not an allergy) but can cause both
allergylike symptoms and symptoms you might not normally attribute to an allergy, such as pain,
fatigue, and eczema. Some of the antibodies produced may also be autoantibodies. The release of
cytokines is also stimulated, which stimulates further recruitment of cells from both the innate and the
adaptive immune systems. It is the final piece of the puzzle.
      A leaky gut provides both the trigger to the body to produce autoantibodies and the extra
stimulus to the adaptive immune system to attack, two of the three necessary ingredients in the recipe
for autoimmune disease (genetic susceptibility being the third).
      In some individuals, a leaky gut can develop slowly—over years or decades. Stress, sleep
deprivation, and some infections may make matters worse very quickly (and unpredictably). Once you
have a leaky gut, it is only a matter of time before other ailments begin to crop up. Depending on the
extent of the damage to the gut lining, the exact substances that leak out, and your specific genetic
makeup, the inflammation and immune reactions caused by a leaky gut can add up to any of a huge
variety of health concerns, many of which can be life-threatening, including autoimmune disease.
      Even normal gut bacteria can provide the stimulus to produce autoantibodies if they leak out of
the gut. A recent research paper showed that proteins in the probiotic strains of bifidobacteria and
lactobacilli (which typically inhabit everyone’s gut) have an incredible similarity to amino acid
sequences within two important proteins for thyroid function—thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin.
In fact, the study definitively showed that antibodies against these thyroid proteins could also bind to
probiotic strains: these antibodies are clinical features of autoimmune thyroid diseases.
      The gut can become leaky for a variety of reasons, but they all have their root in diet and
lifestyle factors. Other causes of a leaky gut include medications, such as corticosteroids and
NSAIDs, and infections, such as many of those described earlier in this chapter. In the case of short-
term courses of medication or infections, what keeps the gut leaky afterward is the extra negative
impact of diet and lifestyle. In the case of chronic infections, diet and lifestyle factors weaken the
immune system to the point that it can’t deal with the invading microorganism.
      A leaky gut is present in every autoimmune disease that has been tested, including rheumatoid
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s and ulcerative colitis), celiac
disease, multiple sclerosis, and type 1 diabetes. It may seem obvious that a leaky gut is present in
celiac disease, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis, which are, after all, pathologies of the gut! But
in these three autoimmune diseases, increased intestinal permeability has been shown to precede
development of the disease. Yep, a leaky gut comes first.
      Perhaps somewhat alarming, a handful of studies have shown increased intestinal permeability
in the healthy relatives of those with autoimmune diseases, as in the case of ankylosing spondylitis.
These people probably have autoimmune susceptibility genes in common with their sick aunt or
cousin or sister. Having a leaky gut—which may be because of diet and lifestyle factors shared by
family members—should be a big red flag.
      You may or may not know that you have a leaky gut. You may or may not have gastrointestinal
symptoms. The destruction of the small intestine’s barrier causes inflammation, which may not cause
overt symptoms in the earlier stages of disease. Reduction of surface area for nutrient absorption can
cause micronutrient deficiencies (deficiencies in vitamins and minerals), which may manifest in a
variety of ways. Damage to the enterocyte layer may result in lactose and fructose intolerance and the
inability to properly digest fats and absorb fat-soluble vitamins, but you may not attribute those to a
leaky gut. In any event, if you suffer from autoimmune disease, the chances are extremely high that you
have a leaky gut.




While the majority of nutrient absorption occurs in the small intestine, some vitamins and
minerals are absorbed in the mouth, stomach, and large intestine. Water is absorbed primarily in
the large intestine.




How Does the Gut Become Leaky?
There are several ways in which the gut epithelial barrier can be breached and damaged. Some
proteins bind to carrier molecules in the brush border of the epithelium, tricking the enterocytes
into transporting them across the barrier. Some proteins irritate or damage the cells. Some
affect the bonds between enterocytes.


     Enterocyte Damage: Damage or destruction of the cells that line the gut occurs when certain
     substances interact with those cells. These substances include pathogens and toxins but also
     some specific dietary proteins, the most important of which are prolamins, agglutinins, and
     saponins, which are found in abundance in grains, legumes, and nightshade vegetables. (Exactly
     how prolamins, agglutinins, and saponins damage enterocytes is discussed further in chapter 2.)
     If an enterocyte dies, it leaves a hole in the gut barrier through which the contents of the gut can
     leak out. These holes are rapidly closed in a healthy individual. But when enterocyte death
     becomes rampant (as is the case in people with certain infections, or who are sensitive to gluten
     and prolamins, or who eat many prolamin-, agglutinin- and saponin-rich foods, or who have gut
     dysbiosis, or who have certain genetic tendencies), the body cannot keep up with the necessity
     for repair, and a leaky gut develops. A confounding factor for many people is a diet deficient in
     important nutrients required for effective repair of the gut barrier (which is also discussed
     further in chapter 2).
     Tight Junctions: The cells that line the gut are bound together by structures known as tight
     junctions. The tight junction is a complex of many different proteins that extend from the inside
     of the cell through the cell membrane to the outside of the cell. These proteins fold in such a way
     as to weave together with proteins from the adjacent cell and form a tight connection. This tight
     connection is essential for the barrier junction of the intestinal epithelium. Beyond this function,
     the tight junctions are also responsible for dividing the cell membrane of the enterocytes into
     two components: the apical membrane (the “top” of the cell, or the part that faces inside the gut)
     and the basolateral membrane (the “sides” and “bottom” of the cell, or the part that faces inside
     the body). Because these parts of the cell membrane have different functions, a properly
     functioning tight junction is critical to a properly functioning cell. In fact, loss of what is called
     epithelial cell polarity (the cell’s ability to know the difference between its apical and its
     basolateral membranes) occurs when tight junctions are not functioning properly, and this is an
     essential precursor to cancer.


There are many ways in which the tight junctions can unravel and open up. In fact, they are not static
structures, but are designed to open and close so that specific nutrients can be absorbed. The problem
occurs when the normally highly controlled regulation of the tight junctions fails and the tight
junctions are left open. This not only creates pores through which substances inside the gut can leak
out into the body, but if the situation persists, it also can signal to the cell to go into apoptosis (i.e.,
commit cell suicide).
      One mechanism through which tight junctions are opened is zonulin. Zonulin, a protein secreted
into the gut by the enterocytes, is supposed to regulate the rapid opening and closing of tight junctions.
However, it is now believed that zonulin may play a critical role in the development of autoimmune
disease. Patients with celiac disease are known to have increased zonulin levels, stimulating the
opening of more tight junctions and probably keeping them open longer. In these patients, the
secretion of zonulin is stimulated by the consumption of gluten (or, more specifically, the protein
fraction of gluten called gliadin). Increased zonulin production, also in response to gluten, also causes
a leaky gut preceding type 1 diabetes. It is believed that this mechanism may be at play in all
autoimmune diseases, which also implies that gluten and similar proteins found in other grains and
pseudo-grains (the starchy seeds of broad-leafed plants such as quinoa) may contribute to leaky gut in
all people suffering from autoimmune disease (more on this on see here).
      Tight junctions are also opened by other dietary proteins, alcohol, elevated cortisol levels, some
medications, some infectious microorganisms, and perhaps as-yet-unidentified substances. Many of
these are discussed in more detail in chapters 2 and 3.
Autoimmune Disease and Gluten

Gluten sensitivity may be the single biggest contributor to a leaky gut in most people with autoimmune
disease. Gluten intolerance means that antibodies are being created against gluten, a protein in wheat
and many other grains, and is estimated to affect 20–40 percent of us. It is measured by testing the
blood for IgE (technically an allergy), IgA, IgG, and sometimes IgM antibodies against the protein
fraction of gluten, gliadin. However, there are currently no tests for IgD antibody formation against
gluten. Furthermore, people can be gluten-sensitive in ways that do not result in antibody formation.
Gluten may cause a leaky gut by interacting with the tight junctions between gut enterocytes (see here
and here). Gluten can also activate immune cells and directly trigger complement release (see here).
Unfortunately, there are no diagnostic tests for these last two mechanisms. The only reliable way to
truly diagnose gluten sensitivity is to stop eating gluten and see if it makes a difference.
      Gluten belongs to a family of proteins called prolamins, which are lectins rich in the amino acid
proline (see here). Lectins are a class of carbohydrate-binding proteins present in all forms of life.
While lectins in general are often vilified as being the cause of a leaky gut, only a subset of lectins
(generally prolamins and agglutinins) are actually of concern because these proteins are difficult to
digest and are known to interact strongly with the brush border of the intestine (to be discussed further
in chapter 2). The human body has a hard time digesting prolamins: our digestive enzymes are not
very good at breaking apart the bond between two prolamins. The result is twofold: first, gluten is
known to cross the intestinal barrier, either intact or partly digested; second, gluten (and other
prolamins) can disproportionally feed the bacteria in the gut, leading to gut dysbiosis (which is
discussed on see here, here, and here).
      Gluten can cross either through the enterocytes (typically damaging them in the process) or
between them (typically leaving tight junctions open after they pass through). Gluten appears to be
able to trick the enterocyte into transporting it across the cell through at least two pathways. But,
transporting it into the body can damage and even kill the enterocyte (which is discussed in more
detail in chapter 2). Gluten is also known to stimulate the release of zonulin, which acts directly on
the tight junctions between the enterocytes to open them up, allowing the contents of the gut to leak
out. Once gluten has leaked out, it interacts with the immune system of the gut. It is important to note
that gluten and other prolamins from grains are also likely to cause the production of autoantibodies
because there are many amino acid sequences in prolamins that are very similar to those of proteins
in the human body.

          “There are actually 140 autoimmune diseases that we’ve identified, and the only
          scientifically agreed upon cause for autoimmune is gluten sensitivity. Now, there are
          other triggers for autoimmune disease. An infection can trigger an autoimmune disease.
          A vitamin deficiency can trigger an autoimmune disease, particularly vitamin D. But
          gluten tends to be kind of that central core hub that’s always present.”
          —DR. PETER OSBORNE, gluten-sensitivity expert

      Celiac disease, multiple sclerosis, dermatitis herpetiformis, and bullous pemphigoid have been
definitively linked to gluten as an environmental trigger. Case studies are beginning to suggest that
gluten sensitivity may be an important trigger for other autoimmune diseases; in some instances, a
gluten-free diet is the only treatment necessary to achieve full remission. Furthermore, the high
prevalence of secondary (and tertiary) autoimmune diseases suffered by those with celiac disease
supports the concept that gluten is a trigger for other autoimmune diseases. Although the exact role
that gluten plays in most autoimmune diseases is elusive, the link between gluten sensitivity and a
leaky gut is so compelling that many experts in the field believe that gluten sensitivity may contribute
to all autoimmune diseases.
      Gluten is extremely good at breaching the intestinal barrier, causing a leaky gut in the process,
and then directly activating the immune system. If you have an autoimmune disease and eat gluten, I
urge you to ban gluten from your diet for the rest of your life. Your body will thank you.




Sometimes the Deck Is Just Stacked Against You
Sometimes not developing an autoimmune disease is like trying to beat the house at blackjack. If you
inherited autoimmune genes, if you were exposed to an environmental trigger, if the antibodies that
your body produces against pathogens also attack your own tissue, the dealer holds all the cards. The
more factors that are stacked against you, the greater the possibility that you will develop an
autoimmune disease, but luck is still a factor. This is important because it’s all too easy to blame
ourselves for our diseases, to look at the foods we ate and the way we lived our lives and assume that
our past choices made us responsible for our current misfortunes.
      It is not your fault.
      The good thing is that you can change how you eat and approach life to heal your gut and remove
that all-important contributor to autoimmune disease. Armed with the knowledge you are gaining by
reading The Paleo Approach, you can make sure that the odds are in your favor. By adopting the
guidelines in The Paleo Approach now rather than after symptoms of autoimmune disease manifest,
you can stop “pushing your luck” and ensure a life of better health.




Testimonial by Whitney Ross Gray




“Multiple sclerosis was scary! I briefly lost my vision and my ability to walk. I was diagnosed two
weeks before my wedding, so I had to have a conversation with my fiancé about the prospect of
him having a disabled wife. These were not things that were supposed to be on my radar. I never
considered myself a “sick” person. But there it was in my life and on my medical records—a
disease. There was nothing I could do but accept it. Or was there?
     When I read and heard about the concept of cutting out gluten and other foods to control MS,
I couldn’t go there. My life revolved around food. I am a foodie from New Jersey, and bread was
deeply entrenched in my life. I actually said the words, “I would rather have MS than not eat
bread.” Fortunately, my unconscious stored the information about dietary intervention, and when
my legs stopped working, I recalled it. Unfortunately, it took almost losing my ability to walk to
motivate me to change my lifestyle.
     It worked. I cut out what others had identified as trigger foods, and within a year I was back
to normal. Actually, I was better than normal. Along with eliminating my MS symptoms, I also lost
a ton of weight and transformed my body from inflamed to supple. The change was profound. I
couldn’t shut up about it! I needed to shout it from the rooftops because it almost didn’t happen. I
almost let my chance to heal slip away simply because I couldn’t imagine not eating bread. That’s
what compelled me to become an advocate for this lifestyle. Someone at the gym recently called
me the poster child for healing MS with diet and lifestyle, and that made me smile! I’ll gladly
accept that honor!”
Whitney Ross Gray blogs at Nutrisclerosis (nutrisclerosis.com).




Gut Dysbiosis

Each of our guts contains approximately 500 to 1,000 species of microorganisms (with about 35,000
species total for all humankind), although about 99 percent of the microorganisms come from thirty to
forty species of bacteria. Different species tend to prefer living in different areas of the digestive
tract, so the bacteria growing in the first part of your small intestine (the duodenum) won’t be the
same as those living in your colon. Some bacteria prefer to live embedded in the mucus layer in close
proximity to the gut epithelium, whereas others like the mass of material being digested far out from
the walls of the gut (the part of your intestine called the lumen). These bacteria are collectively
referred to as our gut microbiota. Because they are beneficial to our health, they are also called
probiotics.
      Our guts are inhabited by other microorganisms besides bacteria, including archaea (similar to
bacteria), viruses, and single-cell eukaryotes (like yeast). In fact, it is estimated that there are seven
to ten times as many microorganisms living in our guts as there are total number of cells in the entire
human body! These microorganisms are collectively referred to as our gut microflora (the term
microflora includes other types of beneficial organisms, like yeast, in addition to bacteria) or
sometimes just gut flora, and we depend on them for health and survival.
      Bacteria actually live in your entire digestive tract, from your mouth to your colon—not just in
your large intestine, as you may have thought. The number of bacteria does, however, vary
significantly, generally increasing progressively down the gastrointestinal tract. For example, there
are only between ten and one thousand bacteria per gram of material (the stuff you are digesting) in
the stomach and the duodenum. The second and third segments of the small intestine (the jejunum and
the ileum, respectively) contain between ten thousand and ten million bacteria per gram of material.
The colon contains between a hundred billion and a trillion (!) bacteria per gram of material.




There are approximately ten trillion cells in the human body and approximately one hundred
trillion microorganisms divided between the gut (70 percent) and other barrier tissues (30
percent).

      The gut microflora perform diverse functions essential to our health. Perhaps best understood is
their role in digestion. Our gut microflora have enzymes that break down certain types of sugars,
starches, and fiber from foods so that we can digest them and absorb their nutrients. Bacteria also
ferment certain carbohydrates in our digestive tracts, producing short-chain fatty acids—such as
acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid—which are extremely beneficial energy sources for the
body and are essential for regulating metabolism. These short-chain fatty acids also aid in the
absorption of minerals, such as calcium, magnesium, copper, zinc, and iron. Our gut bacteria aid in
the absorption of minerals in other ways, too. They liberate minerals that are complexed with phytate
(an antinutrient present to varying degrees in all plant-based foods that binds minerals and makes
them less absorbable; see here), making those minerals available for absorption. Our gut bacteria
also synthesize vitamins—B and K vitamins in particular—which our bodies then absorb (and which
provide us with important micronutrients that we may not get enough of otherwise). Gut bacteria may
also play a key role in facilitating absorption of dietary fatty acids, thereby increasing absorption of
important fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. Deficiencies in many of the micronutrients mentioned
above are known to be contributing factors to autoimmune disease and are discussed further in
chapter 2. Clearly, our gut microflora are important.
      Our gut microbiota also have a direct impact on the immune system, the details of which are still
being heavily studied. Healthy gut microbiota are critical for the development and maturation of the
immune system, and different bacterial components modulate different aspects of the immune system.
For example, a complete lack of gut microbiota is known to result in severe deficiencies of most
CD4+ T cells but an increase of Th2 cells. Some bacterial components are known to balance Th1,
Th2, and Th3 cell populations through regulation of dendritic cell activation (increasing or
decreasing dendritic cell activation, depending on the circumstance). Some bacterial components
stimulate the production of Th17 cells, some modulate the activation of natural killer cells, and some
influence the interaction between antigen receptors on the immune cell surfaces and the antigens
themselves. These friendly bacteria not only keep the immune system in check during times of health
but also help contribute to the immune defense against invading pathogens; for example, by
stimulating the production of antibodies against foreign microorganisms.




What Is an Antinutrient?
Quite simply, an antinutrient is any substance in your diet that interferes with the absorption of
nutrients from your food. Some antinutrients occur naturally (these are the ones that are predominantly
discussed in this book), and others are synthetic. Antinutrients are discussed in more detail in chapter
2.



      The microorganisms in our gut help maintain the delicate balance required by our immune
system, keeping the various populations of immune cells in check and modulating their activity.
Achieving a healthy balance in the immune system is therefore reliant on having a healthy population
of gut microflora, growing in the correct numbers in the correct locations and with appropriate
diversity.
      Gut dysbiosis is a general term that refers to any abnormality in the gut microflora. This includes
too many or too few microorganisms growing in the various sections of the gastrointestinal tract, the
wrong kinds of microorganisms or the wrong balance between the different populations of
microorganisms, and microorganisms in the wrong place. Any of these situations can have a profound
impact on digestion and the modulation of our immune systems. Gut dysbiosis is often seen in
autoimmune disease.
      The most common form of gut dysbiosis is overgrowth of bacteria or yeast in the small intestine.
This is referred to as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, or SIBO. (This term does apply to yeast
overgrowth, but bacterial overgrowths are actually far more common.) Now believed to be the cause
of irritable bowel syndrome (or at least some forms of IBS, which is probably a collection of
disorders that have yet to be sorted out), there is also a high prevalence of SIBO in every autoimmune
disease in which the presence of SIBO has been evaluated. Very importantly, overgrowth of bacteria
in the small intestine can be a direct cause of a leaky gut.
      A variety of factors can cause gut dysbiosis. Antibiotic use, as well as the consumption of meat
and dairy from animals treated with antibiotics, is known to have a detrimental effect on gut
microflora, both in absolute number and in diversity. (Certain strains are killed by antibiotics,
allowing other strains to grow too numerous.) While I am not suggesting that you steer clear of
antibiotics completely, I am suggesting that you avoid excessive and unwarranted use (see here). And
I am suggesting that you avoid consuming animal products from animals treated with antibiotics.
      An extremely important, yet often overlooked, cause of gut dysbiosis is diet. Because the
bacteria in your gut feed off the food you eat, what you eat can directly impact their numbers. This is
especially true when it comes to grains, which our bodies are not well adapted to digest and which
provide a large amount of complex carbohydrates to the microorganisms in our guts. This excess food
for microorganisms in our guts enables them to replicate beyond normal numbers—that is, they
overgrow—directly causing SIBO. However, any food that is difficult to digest can contribute to
bacterial overgrowth. This is especially true if there are other hindrances to digestion, such as low
stomach acid, inadequate pancreatic enzymes, or inadequate bile salts.
     A healthy gut means more than just fixing a leaky one. It also means restoring the gut microflora
to appropriate numbers, location, and diversity. Following the guidelines in The Paleo Approach
will automatically create a gut environment conducive to a healthy contingent of microflora.
However, recommendations for probiotic support and supplements are also detailed in chapters 5 and
7.
Changing What Is in Your Power to Change


          “God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, The courage to
          change the things I can, And the wisdom to know the difference.”
          —THE SERENITY PRAYER

As you’ve learned from reading through this chapter, there is no one thing that causes autoimmune
disease. Instead, a combination of factors conspire to create an environment conducive to the
development of autoimmune disease: genetics, environmental triggers, and a leaky gut caused by diet
and lifestyle factors. The trick is to change the environment so that it no longer favors disease, but
instead favors health.
      As I’ve already mentioned, many of the triggers discussed in this chapter are factors you cannot
change. So what can you change? You can change the environment in your gut by changing what you
eat and how you live. You can give your body the nutrition it needs to heal. You can regulate your
circadian rhythms and stress hormones by making sleep, time outside, and gentle exercise a priority.
These are the actions that will heal your gut, reduce inflammation, and stop the ongoing stimulation of
your immune system.
      As I make a case for diet and lifestyle factors in autoimmune disease, I don’t want you to think
that poor diet caused your autoimmune disease. It is a contributor, but it is not the cause. You did not
do this to yourself by making uninformed food choices and not going to the gym five times a week.
However, moving toward health will still require leaving some foods behind, and it is important to
understand what not to eat and why.
Chapter 1 Review


   The immune system can be divided into two parts: the innate immune system and the adaptive
   immune system.




   The innate immune system is nonspecific (not targeted against anything in particular) and is
   responsible for general inflammation. When the job is too big for the innate immune system to
   handle, the adaptive immune system is called into action.




   The adaptive immune system is specific (targeted against specific foreign invaders). Antibodies
   target small sequences of amino acids, contained in proteins, from foreign invaders. The
   adaptive immune system is responsible for remembering foreign invaders so that it can respond
   more efficiently to subsequent attacks (which is why you get the chicken pox only once).




   In autoimmune disease, the adaptive immune system loses the ability to distinguish between
   proteins and cells within the human body and those from foreign invaders.




   In autoimmune disease, the immune system is stimulated to attack, which causes damage to cells
   and tissues in the body. That damage is what produces the symptoms of the disease.
Genes account for one-third of an individual’s risk for an autoimmune disease. There is no
single autoimmunity gene, but rather a variety of genes that collectively increase risk.




The other two-thirds of an individual’s risk for autoimmune disease comes from environmental
triggers, diet, and lifestyle.




Environmental triggers include previous infections (viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitical),
persistent infections (viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitical), exposure to toxins, and hormonal
conditions in the body.




Gluten may be an important trigger in all autoimmune diseases.




A leaky gut is necessary for autoimmune disease to develop.
Chapter 2
Dietary Factors That Contribute to Autoimmunity


          “One-quarter of what you eat keeps you alive. The other three-quarters keeps your
          doctor alive.”
          —HIEROGLYPH IN AN EGYPTIAN TOMB


The prevalence of autoimmune disease is on the rise, with rates estimated to be increasing by 2–10
percent a year. Certainly some of this increase is due to increased awareness and improved
diagnostic techniques, but the overwhelming consensus among physicians and medical researchers is
that better diagnostics accounts for only a fraction of the growing incidence. This trend perfectly
mirrors the increases in obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease seen over the last forty
years. Could it be that they have are causal factors in common? Since obesity, type 2 diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease are all known to be linked to diet (specifically diets high in refined
carbohydrates, trans fats, and omega-6 fats and low in fiber and micronutrients), could it be that the
way we eat is also contributing to autoimmune disease?

The answer is yes! Although the mechanisms are still only partly understood, what we do understand
broadly falls into three categories:
                     Dietary factors that contribute to nutrient deficiencies
                     Dietary factors that contribute to a leaky gut or gut dysbiosis
                     Dietary factors that contribute to inflammation or immune activation

Micronutrient deficiencies that arise from not eating enough nutritionally dense foods (or not digesting
those foods properly) contribute to a defective immune system and hinder the body’s ability to heal. A
variety of mineral and vitamin deficiencies have been very strongly correlated with autoimmune
disease.

Understanding which dietary factors contribute to autoimmune disease is in large part about
understanding which dietary factors contribute to a leaky gut or to gut dysbiosis. The foods you eat
(and the foods you don’t eat but should) can impact the health of your gut in a variety of ways. Some
foods irritate the lining of the gut directly, damaging enterocytes and creating holes for the contents of
your gut to leak into your body. Some foods feed overgrowth of bacteria and yeast, causing gut
dysbiosis (more specifically causing small intestinal bacterial overgrowth), which itself causes a
leaky gut.

There are also foods that contribute to inflammation, and while autoimmune disease cannot be
directly attributed to them, the ability to heal from autoimmune disease is limited as long as these
foods are consumed. Yet other foods act as adjuvants, meaning that they don’t cause autoimmunity but
do stimulate the immune system to attack. The most common application of adjuvants is in vaccines,
where they are added to ramp up the response to the antigen and ensure that immunity develops. This
is required in order to ensure that the body develops immunity because the antigens included in
vaccines are either dead pathogens or pathogens that have been modified to be inert. Because the
pathogens can’t replicate, something needs to be included in the vaccine to stimulate the immune
system to form antibodies; this is called an adjuvant. Great in vaccines, not so great in food.

Diet and nutritional status are among the most important, modifiable determinants of human health.
Which is to say: What you eat greatly impacts your health, and you have complete control over it.
Think of this chapter as the “foods to avoid” chapter. I believe that understanding why a food is a
problem will motivate you to remove it from your diet. For a summary of which foods to avoid, feel
free to skip ahead to here. If you prefer to focus on which foods to eat, feel free to skip ahead to
chapter 5. Otherwise, here we go, digging into the science.
Nutrient-Poor Diets

Nutrition and nutritional status (whether your body has the nutrients it needs) have profound effects on
immune function, resistance to infection, and autoimmunity. Nutrients influence the immune system,
enhancing or depressing its activity, depending on the nutrient and how much of it is consumed and
absorbed. In particular, the lack of dietary nutrients, especially in conjunction with a surplus of
carbohydrates and certain inflammatory fats, has been strongly linked to the development and
progression of autoimmune disease.
     The Western diet, or Standard American Diet, is a good example of a nutrient-poor diet with
excessive carbohydrates and inflammatory fats (which explains the increase in so many diseases). As
a general rule, we are well fed and undernourished. You might think that I mean people whose diets
are rich in fast food, processed food, and junk food. I do. But I also mean people who believe they
are eating a healthy diet—one full of whole grains and low-fat dairy.




Macronutrients are carbohydrates, fats, and proteins in your food. Micronutrients are the
vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals.

     A startlingly large percentage of Americans routinely fail to meet the recommended daily
allowance (RDA) of a wide variety of vitamins and minerals. Depending on which vitamin and
mineral, the percentage ranges from 17 percent (for vitamin B12) to 73 percent (for zinc) of
Americans over the age of two. On average, Americans are also deficient in the other B vitamins,
vitamin A, vitamin D, iron, magnesium, calcium—the list goes on and on. Deficiencies in a number of
these vitamins and minerals have been solidly linked to autoimmune disease.
     Why is the Western diet so deficient in vitamins and minerals? In many ways, grains are to
blame. Even whole grains are not nutritionally dense foods: vegetables contain at least as many
vitamins and minerals (and often ten times more!). The only exceptions are sodium and manganese,
which grains and vegetables have equal amounts of, and selenium, which grains have more of (but is
found in greater quantities in meat, seafood, poultry, nuts, and eggs). Dairy is also a nutritional
lightweight. When these foods displace meats, fish, vegetables, and fruits from our diet, the
micronutrient density of our diet decreases and our bodies suffer. Other factors that figure in the sad
state of our nutrition include the depletion of trace minerals from our soil because of industrial
farming and the diminished nourishment in meat from factory-farmed, grain-fed animals. Grains and
dairy are problematic for other reasons, which will be discussed later in this chapter.



How Nutrient-Poor Is the Western Diet?
Micronutrient             % Not Meeting RDA
Vitamin A                 56.2
Vitamin B1 (Thiamine)     30.2
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 30.0
Vitamin B3 (Niacin)     25.9
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine) 53.6
Vitamin B9 (Folate)               33.2
Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) 17.2
Vitamin C                         37.5
Calcium                           65.1
Iron                              39.1
Magnesium                         61.6
Phosphorus                        27.4
Zinc                              73.3

This table shows the thirteen vitamins and minerals most lacking in the American diet and the
percentages of all individuals older than two who are not meeting the U.S. recommended daily
allowances.

Reprinted with permission from L. Cordain et al., “Origins and Evolution of the Western Diet: Health Implications for the 21st Century,”
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 81 (2005): 341–354.




Which Comes First, Micronutrient Deficiency or Autoimmune
Disease?




Although epidemiological studies reveal a correlation between low dietary intake of specific
nutrients, or nutrient deficiency as measured by blood test, and increased risk of autoimmune disease,
these studies are mostly designed to create a foundation for future studies rather than to determine
causality. In most cases, we don’t know if nutritional deficiency is a precursor to autoimmune disease
or if nutritional deficiency is a result of autoimmune disease. Certainly, both are possible. And
certainly, many patients with autoimmune disease are deficient in a variety of micronutrients. Clearly,
there is a link.
     Many micronutrients are immune modulators, meaning that sufficient amounts of these substances
are required to regulate the immune system. Dietary insufficiency or malabsorption of vitamins
because of an inflamed and leaky gut may contribute to the immune system’s becoming overstimulated
in autoimmune disease. However, the need for these micronutrients also increases when inflammation
is present. It could be that those with autoimmune disease become deficient because their bodies need
more of these vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants to help control inflammation when their immune
systems go into overdrive. Either way, there is a need for increased intake of these important nutrients
to help control inflammation, regulate the immune system, and heal the body.



      The contemporary Western diet is also extremely deficient in good fats. Deficiencies in fat lead
to deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins, which is one of the biggest risk factors for autoimmune
disease. Our diets became lower in essential fats when fats, especially saturated fats, were scorned
as the alleged cause of cardiovascular disease in the mid-1970s. While research has proved that
saturated fat does not increase cardiovascular risk (sugar does), it seems to be taking a long time for
this information to percolate through society. (It’s already been understood for more than a decade
that low-fat diets do not prevent cardiovascular disease and instead put you at greater risk of a
variety of other ailments, but low-fat diets are still broadly recommended by nutritionists and
doctors.) Part of the problem is that mechanically separated seed oils (like canola, corn, soy, and
safflower) have replaced healthier saturated fats (like butter, lard, tallow, and coconut oil) in our
diets. These seed oils are very high in omega-6 polyunsaturated fats, which contribute to the huge
disproportion between omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid intake. (For more on this see here and here.)



Micronutrients in Grains versus Vegetables




These graphs show the relative content of vitamins and minerals in grains compared with vegetables,
adjusted for caloric content, using eight of the most nutrient-dense whole-grain foods and fifty
commonly found vegetables. Values are expressed as the percentage of the vitamin or mineral in
grains compared with vegetables (for example, grains have about 10 percent of the vitamin E content
that vegetables have).

                                                                     Data was obtained from the USDA database.
The Stomach Acid Connection




Low stomach acid is a surprisingly common problem, but one that gets little attention. Aging is one of
the primary causes of low stomach acid, but other important causes include adrenal fatigue (more
technically called adrenal insufficiency), alcohol consumption, bacterial infection, chronic stress (see
here), and certain medications (see here).
      When you eat, the cells that line your stomach produce gastric acid and some digestive enzymes.
The acid and enzymes start breaking down your food into the individual constituents that will be
transported across the gut barrier by the enterocytes and enter the bloodstream or lymphatic system
later. Stomach acid is especially critical for breaking down proteins into the individual amino acids
that you need for just about everything. When the acidic contents of your stomach empty into the first
part of your small intestine (the duodenum), the acidity of those contents (the chyme) sends signals
both to your pancreas to release digestive enzymes into your small intestine and to your gallbladder to
release bile (which contains bile salts, which are produced by the liver and help break down fats)
into your small intestine. Stomach acid also protects the stomach from bacterial and fungal
overgrowth (bacteria and fungus cannot thrive in an acidic environment) and is critical for absorption
of many vitamins and minerals.
      Inadequate stomach acid means that the pancreas and gallbladder are not secreting enough
enzymes or bile—this directly impacts your body’s ability to digest food. Inadequate stomach acid
and digestive enzymes mean that your food is not properly digested, so you end up with “big” pieces
of food in your small intestine. One result is malabsorption of nutrients (both macronutrients and
micronutrients). But perhaps more worrisome is that this undigested food becomes an excellent
source of food for bacteria and yeast in your small intestine and colon—causing gut dysbiosis. Those
big pieces of food slow peristalsis and thus increase transit time (the time it takes food to go in one
end and come out the other). The bacteria and yeast reproduce like rabbits (or worse, like bacteria
and yeast!), and you end up with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), causing irritation to
the gut lining, inflammation, and production of toxins that must be filtered by the liver.
      As strange as it sounds, the symptoms of low stomach acid are virtually the same as the
symptoms of an overproduction of stomach acid. Increased levels of bacteria in your small intestine
cause increased gas production. Coupled with a slower digestion, the increased volume in your small
intestine puts pressure on your stomach and on the lower esophageal sphincter, whose job is to let
food into your stomach without letting stomach acid out. This pressure keeps the lower esophageal
sphincter from doing its job, and stomach acid and other stomach contents escape into the esophagus,
causing heartburn, indigestion, and acid reflux. Other symptoms of too little stomach acid include
diarrhea, constipation, bloating, belching, gas, bad breath, nausea, vomiting, rectal itching, and
hemorrhoids. Not to mention the host of illnesses related to the gut irritation and inflammation caused
by SIBO and a leaky gut—like autoimmune disease.
      You may be treating what you assume is too much stomach acid (perhaps because of acid reflux)
—with antacids, proton-pump inhibitors, and H2 blockers (see here)—when in reality, you need
more stomach acid, not less! Unless an overproduction of stomach acid has been diagnosed, the
solution is to stop taking acid-reducing medications and start digestive-support supplements
(discussed on see here) concurrently with adopting the protocols in The Paleo Approach. A few other
important tips include sitting at a table to eat, making sure that mealtime is a peaceful time in your
day, chewing your food thoroughly, and drinking the majority of your liquids between, not during,
meals.




The pancreas also releases bicarbonates to neutralize the stomach acid for the next phase of
digestion in your small intestine.




The Problem with Processed Foods
           Beets           Table Sugar
           (100g or ¾ cup) (7g or 2 tsp)
Sugars     7g              7g
Vitamin A 2µg              0µg
Vitamin B1 31µg            0µg
Vitamin B2 40µg            1µg
Vitamin B3 334µg             0µg
Vitamin B5 200µg             0µg
Vitamin B6 67µg              0µg
Vitamin B9 109µg             0µg
Vitamin C 4.9mg              0µg
Calcium 16mg                 0µg
Potassium 325mg              0µg
Magnesium 23mg                         0µg
Phosphorus 40mg                        0µg
Zinc       400µg                       0µg
Copper     100µg                       0µg
Selenium 0.7µg                         0µg
Manganese 300µg                        0µg




A microgram (µg) is a millionth of a gram.

The more a food is processed or refined, the more nutrients are stripped out of that food. For
example, there is a difference as wide as the Grand Canyon between the superb micronutrient content
of beets (which are especially rich in vitamin B9 and manganese but also contain vitamins A, B1, B2,
B3, B5, B6, and C, as well as calcium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, zinc, copper, and
selenium) and the micronutrient content of table sugar, which contains no vitamins or minerals
whatsoever, even though it is made from sugar beets.
     Beyond the fact that refining and processing foods removes valuable nutrients from those foods,
processing often adds or creates antinutrients (substances that hinder the absorption of nutrients from
your food), not to mention other compounds (such as preservatives) with dubious health effects
(typically toxic even in moderate quantities). This is discussed further here.




     Poor digestion, a damaged and inflamed gut, and gut dysbiosis can also lead to nutrient
deficiencies. Even when you are eating only the most nutritionally dense foods, deficiencies can arise
because the body is unable to properly digest or absorb nutrients.
     Nutritional deficiency is one of the greatest risk factors for autoimmune disease. Not only do our
current diets not supply sufficient essential nutrients to keep us healthy, but we certainly aren’t
consuming the additional micronutrients required for healing from autoimmune disease.
     A variety of specific micronutrient deficiencies have been strongly linked to increased risk of
autoimmune disease. Other micronutrient deficiencies are not directly tied to autoimmune disease but
are known to promote inflammation. While this is by no means an exhaustive list of possible
micronutrient deficiencies that may be contributing to your autoimmune disease, these are probably
the most crucial.


Antioxidants

      Oxidants (oxygen radicals or free radicals) are a natural by-product of our metabolisms.
Oxidants are chemicals that cause oxidative damage to proteins (and therefore cells) in our bodies
and stimulate inflammation. In fact, it is the lifetime buildup of oxidative damage that causes aging
and ultimately leads to death. Furthermore, oxidants are produced by inflammatory cells as part of the
body’s natural defense mechanisms, meaning that those with autoimmune disease have more oxidative
stress (which is the term for the accumulation of oxidative damage in our bodies).
      Oxidants do have normal roles in our bodies (including acting as tools of our immune cells to
kill foreign invaders), but it’s very important to keep their production/levels tightly controlled. Our
bodies have developed a variety of ways to protect our tissues and minimize oxidative damage
(which is why it typically takes eighty-plus years to get to us). One way is through a variety of
compounds with antioxidant activities, which bind to oxidants (which is called scavenging) or
otherwise render oxidants harmless. These compounds broadly fall into three classes:




                   Proteins and enzymes produced by our bodies (also known as endogenous
                   enzymes), such as glutathione peroxidase (a selenoenzyme), superoxide
                   dismutase, and nitric oxide synthase
                   Fat-soluble organic compounds with antioxidant activity, such as tocopherols
                   (vitamin E), carotenes and carotenoids (vitamin A), and ubiquinols (coenzyme
                   Q10)
                    Water-soluble organic compounds with antioxidant activity, such as plant
                   polyphenols or flavonoids, ascorbate (vitamin C), alpha lipoic acid (an
                    organosulfur compound), and glutathione (a peptide composed of L-cysteine, L-
                    glutamic acid, and glycine)

      A healthy supply of antioxidants is critical not only for controlling oxidative damage to the body
but also for controlling inflammation. Oxidants enhance cytokine production by our immune cells in
response to inflammatory stimuli. In the context of autoimmune disease, this means that an excess of
oxidants increases inflammation and the stimulation of the immune system.
      An oversupply of oxidants is a direct result of a diet that is too high in sugars and complex
carbohydrates—like the Standard American Diet. While all foods cause the production of oxidants
(because they are a natural by-product of metabolism), studies evaluating diets with high-glycemic
loads (diets with foods that increase blood sugar substantially, such as grains and sugar-laden junk
foods) have shown that high-glycemic diets cause much more inflammation than diets with lower
glycemic loads. In fact, diets rich in high-glycemic load foods—such as wheat, potatoes, and oats—
actually increase inflammatory genes and markers of inflammation. This doesn’t mean that you need to
eat a low-carb diet, but it does mean that you shouldn’t eat a high-carb diet. Regulation of blood sugar
and maintenance of insulin sensitivity are critical for controlling the production of oxidants and
inflammatory cytokines. This will be discussed in more detail here.
      While a lack of dietary antioxidants is not explicitly linked to autoimmune disease, increasing
dietary antioxidants or taking antioxidant supplements has been shown to be beneficial in several
autoimmune conditions, including autoimmune thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Also, some endogenous antioxidants (antioxidants produced by the body, glutathione in particular) are
produced in lower quantities in those with autoimmune disease. It may simply be that more dietary or
supplemental antioxidants are needed for those with autoimmune diseases to counteract the higher
levels of oxidants produced by their immune cells and reduce inflammation in general.
      Although different antioxidants are found in different foods, all the foods recommended in the
Paleo Approach are rich in antioxidants. A variety of minerals are also important for their antioxidant
contributions, including copper, manganese, selenium, and zinc. Consuming a variety of vegetables,
organ meats, fish, and bone broth, while also avoiding high-glycemic load foods, will help create a
healthy balance between antioxidants and oxidants to reduce inflammation.




“But Doesn’t Eating Saturated Fat and Cholesterol Cause Heart
Disease? And Won’t It Make Me Fat?”
Eating animal fats, including saturated fats and cholesterol, has repeatedly been shown not to increase
the risk of cardiovascular disease. In fact, eating adequate fat is essential for life. The membranes of
every cell in your body are made of fat molecules. Many hormones are made of fat, specifically
cholesterol. Neurotransmitters need cholesterol in order to function properly. Your brain is 60
percent fat. You need fat in order to absorb fat-soluble vitamins. If you do not consume enough fat,
including cholesterol, every system in your body suffers.
      What does increase the risk of cardiovascular disease? Being substantially overweight and
eating a diet rich in refined carbohydrates.
      Furthermore, eating a diet rich in fats—especially quality animal fats, fats from fish, and fats
from coconut, avocado, and olives—will not only not make you fat, but will help you achieve a
healthier weight. This is in part because insulin release facilitates energy storage. The exact dietary
factors contributing to the rise in obesity are still a topic of intense study, but the most consistent
association is with a high intake of sugar-sweetened beverages. Recent research has extended this
association to all sugars, but only in the context of hypercaloric diets (when you consume more
calories than you use throughout the day). This means that both excessive dietary sugars and too many
calories are the important contributors to obesity.
      When high-quality fats replace sugars in the diet, people tend to lose weight and reduce their
risk factors for cardiovascular disease—probably because of blood-sugar stabilization, effects on
hormones that regulate hunger and metabolism, improved nutritional status, and the body’s ability to
better synthesize vitamin D. Dietary fat (as well as some important micronutrients) is required for the
normal, healthful synthesis of cholesterol. Cholesterol is the major building block of all steroid
hormones, a class of hormones that includes cortisol, estrogen, and testosterone. The body even
converts cholesterol into vitamin D in response to sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency is strongly
correlated with cardiovascular disease. No wonder cardiovascular disease increased after saturated
fats were vilified as the cause!
      So does this mean that high blood cholesterol isn’t bad for you after all? Sadly, no. The
importance of cholesterol doesn’t mean that you don’t have to worry about having high levels in your
body. But there is a huge difference between cholesterol in your cells and cholesterol in your blood.
And while having high blood cholesterol is not the cause of cardiovascular disease, when you
combine it with high blood triglycerides and high levels of inflammation markers (such as C-reactive
protein), it indicates increased risk for cardiovascular disease. It is important to emphasize, though,
that while reducing these risk factors is important, avoiding dietary fat is not the way to do it.

                                 You need to eat fat to be healthy.




Fat-Soluble Vitamins

All the fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) have potent immunomodulatory properties (meaning they
regulate the immune system), and every single one is potentially therapeutic in autoimmune disease.
      A variety of autoimmune diseases have been linked to fat-soluble vitamin deficiency, especially
vitamins A, D, and E. (Vitamin K is the new guy on the scene, and there have been few studies
examining its role in inflammation and immunity.) In fact, deficiency in these vitamins seems to be
rampant these days thanks to the move away from eating and cooking with quality animal fats (like
butter, lard, tallow, and bacon grease—preferably from pasture-raised animals) toward eating and
cooking with typically less nutrient-dense vegetable oils (like olive oil, canola oil, and safflower
oil).
      Because the Paleo Approach embraces healthy amounts of high-quality sources of fat—rendered
animal fats, oily cold-water fish, and meat from pastured and grass-fed animals—it naturally
promotes healthier levels of fat-soluble vitamins.

Vitamin A. Vitamin A is a fundamental nutrient involved in many, many diverse functions in the
human body, from bone health to ocular health to immune health. Its most relevant role in autoimmune
disease is regulation of the immune system.
      Vitamin A is essential for maintenance and normal regeneration of mucosal barriers, such as the
gut epithelium. Vitamin A is also critical for normal function of inflammatory cells, such as
neutrophils, macrophages, and natural killer cells. Vitamin A deficiency is strongly associated with
impaired immunity and susceptibility to infectious disease and has been associated with several
autoimmune diseases, including alopecia areata, multiple sclerosis, and autoimmune hepatitis.
      Vitamin A levels have a profound effect on different T cell subpopulations, cytokines, and
production of various antibody subclasses. In particular, vitamin A deficiency diminishes antibody-
mediated responses directed by Th2 cells, thereby contributing to overstimulation of Th1 cells.
Perhaps most persuasive is recent evidence that vitamin A (in the form of retinoic acid) supports
regulatory T cell formation (by stimulating the differentiation of CD4+ T cells into regulatory T cells
in the thymus). This is very important in the context of autoimmune disease and may be the key to the
benefits observed in vitamin A supplementation studies. Supplementation with vitamin A has been
shown to reduce the numbers of Th17 cells in an animal model of autoimmune arthritis. And
supplementation of vitamin A in children with a variety of gut pathogens (including Escherichia coli
and Giardia lamblia) showed marked reduction of inflammatory markers and resolution of infection.
Vitamin A supplementation has also been shown to be extremely beneficial in patients with alopecia
areata and those with multiple sclerosis (with improvements attributed directly to immune modulation
by vitamin A).



Consumption of Animal Fat Versus Vegetable Oil
The move from animal fats to vegetable oils also affects health by changing the types of fats
consumed, an issue discussed further on see here and here.

Data from the USDA Economic Research Service, Food Availability (Per Capita) Data System (www.ers.usda.gov).




Vitamin D. The best-understood fat-soluble vitamin—in terms of its role in autoimmune disease—is
vitamin D. And of all the fat-soluble vitamins, there is the strongest evidence that vitamin D
deficiency is a cause of (or at least a contributor to) autoimmune disease. In fact, vitamin D
deficiency may explain the increase in some autoimmune diseases in relation to geography:
rheumatoid arthritis, for example, is more prevalent farther away from the equator (and exposure to
strong sunlight year-round).
      Vitamin D is synthesized from cholesterol embedded in the outer cell membranes of skin cells
(both epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts) in response to absorption of UVB radiation
from the sun. It is a steroid hormone that controls expression of more than two hundred genes and the
proteins those genes regulate. Vitamin D is essential for mineral metabolism (it regulates absorption
and transport of calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium) and for bone mineralization and growth. It is
also involved in the biosynthesis of neurotrophic factors, regulating release of such important
hormones as serotonin (required not only for mental health but also for healthy digestion; see here).
Vitamin D helps control cell growth, so it is essential for healing. It also activates areas of the brain
responsible for biorhythms (see here). Scientists continue to search for new ways in which vitamin D
is essential for human health; for example, there is now evidence that vitamin D may prevent cancer.
Eating Wheat Bran Reduces Vitamin D!




Epidemiological studies performed in the early 1980s showed that vitamin D deficiency and rickets
(a disease characterized by soft bones caused by deficiency in vitamin D, phosphorus, and calcium)
were much higher in people who ate lots of unleavened whole-grain breads, despite adequate sun
exposure. By way of understanding why, one group of researchers compared the plasma vitamin D
levels of volunteers eating a “normal” diet with volunteers whose diets were supplemented with sixty
grams of wheat bran daily. After thirty days, the wheat-bran volunteers had significantly lower
vitamin D levels. Although how wheat-bran consumption influences vitamin D was not determined
with certainty, the authors speculated that something in the bran interfered with enterohepatic
circulation of vitamin D metabolites (i.e., vitamin D recycling from gut to liver; see here) and caused
enhanced elimination of vitamin D in the intestines (so instead of being reabsorbed in the gut, vitamin
D was excreted). Calcium deficiency may also increase inactivation of vitamin D in the liver.
      Vitamin D is also crucial for regulating several key components of the immune system, including
formation of important antioxidants and controlling subpopulations of T cells. Most important,
regulatory T cell function is dependent on vitamin D (meaning that regulatory T cells can’t perform
their duties without vitamin D). In addition, vitamin D decreases Th1 cells and is known to help
balance Th1 and Th2 cell populations. Vitamin D also modulates activity of macrophages, dendritic
cells, and both T cells and B cells.
      Vitamin D deficiency is strongly linked to autoimmune disease and has been implicated as an
environmental trigger for systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 diabetes, autoimmune interstitial lung
disease, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, celiac disease, psoriasis, and inflammatory bowel
disease. Preliminary studies of vitamin D3 supplementation or increasing dietary intake of vitamin D
have shown some decrease in autoimmune disease. Vitamin D does not work in isolation, meaning
that supplementation with high levels of vitamin D3 is not in itself a solution; synergy with other fat-
soluble vitamins, plant-based antioxidants, and even estrogen is involved. However, addressing
vitamin D deficiencies, especially in the context of also addressing gut health, hormone regulation,
stress, and other micronutrient deficiencies, is extremely important for healing from autoimmune
disease.

Vitamin E. Vitamin E is actually a group of eight fat-soluble compounds that includes both
tocopherols and tocotrienols. Vitamin E’s main role in the immune system appears to be its
antioxidant activity, but it has also been shown to promote maturation of T cells in the thymus.
Perhaps most important in the context of autoimmune disease, vitamin E appears to influence positive
selection in the thymus gland (see here), meaning that vitamin E deficiencies have profound effects on
both the relative numbers of the different types of T cells and their ability to perform their respective
functions.
      Vitamin E deficiency has been implicated in psoriasis, vitiligo, alopecia areata, and rheumatoid
arthritis. Vitamin E supplementation has been shown to reduce inflammation in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. These effects are magnified by the addition of conjugated linoleic acid (see
here).




Can You Overdose on Fat-Soluble Vitamins?
Technically, yes. However, an important synergistic relationship among these vitamins helps prevent
overdose. For example, vitamin D strongly protects against vitamin A toxicity, and vitamin A strongly
protects against vitamin D toxicity. As long as you consume both together, even very high amounts are
quite safe. Studies on animals indicate that optimal intakes of vitamins A and D are actually very high
(higher than the current RDA). I am not suggesting that you supplement with huge doses of those
vitamins, however—the balance among fat-soluble vitamins is delicate and complex. For example,
large amounts of vitamins A and D increase the need for vitamin K2. But you don’t have to do the
math: these vitamins are all found in the appropriate proportions in high-quality animal foods. Studies
that evaluate toxicity of fat-soluble vitamins look at supplementation of a specific vitamin in
isolation. When these vitamins are consumed as whole foods, even from large servings of the most
concentrated food sources of these vitamins (like liver), there is very little reason to be concerned
about toxicity.




Vitamin K. It has long been known that vitamin K is essential for the production of blood-clotting
factors. However, the discovery that there are indeed two forms of vitamin K—K1 (phyloquinone)
and K2 (menaquinone)—has enabled new roles for these vitamins in the human body to be identified.
While understanding vitamin K2 is still in its infancy, it is now known to be essential for bone and
dental health, and K2 supplementation is being investigated for the treatment of osteoporosis. More
relevant to autoimmune disease, vitamin K2 has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties.
Specifically, vitamin K2 protects neurons from the oxidative damage induced by methylmercury (see
here). Increased dietary intake of vitamin K2 reduces the risk of coronary heart disease, aortic
atherosclerosis, and even all-cause mortality (meaning that the richer in vitamin K2 your diet is, the
less likely you are to die from anything, even old age!). In a study of multiple sclerosis in animals,
supplementation with vitamin K2 improved symptoms, inflammation, and immune function.
     The best sources of vitamin K2 are animal products (especially from pastured animals) and
fermented foods, but it can also be produced by the microflora in your small intestine from dietary
vitamin K1, which is abundant in leafy green vegetables.




Water-Soluble Vitamins

There is less evidence of links between autoimmune disease and deficiencies in water-soluble
vitamins than deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins, which may reflect the fact that deficiencies in
water-soluble vitamins are less common or that their role in the immune system is less fundamental.
However, there are still some interesting associations worth mentioning.

Vitamin C. Vitamin C, or ascorbic acid or ascorbate, is an extremely important antioxidant (see
here). Adequate levels are essential for preventing gastritis (whether the cause is autoimmune,
chemical, or infectious) and are helpful in controlling persistent infections like H. pylori. Patients
with lichen planus and with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura have been found to have low levels
of vitamin C. While vitamin C may not have a direct role in modulating the immune system, its
antioxidant properties seem to be important in controlling the damage caused by the oxidants
produced by inflammatory cells.

B Vitamins. There are eight numbered B vitamins (similar to other vitamins like vitamin E, some of
these B vitamins are actually groups of highly similar compounds rather than each vitamin name and
number referring to a single molecule), all of which are important for cellular metabolism. Vitamins
B6 (pyridoxine), B9 (folate), and B12 (cobalamin) are also critical for supporting the methyl cycle
(see here). Importantly, changes in DNA methylation (both too much and too little) have been
implicated in autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, so it is not surprising that
these three B vitamins in particular are the ones that have been linked to autoimmune disease.
     Vitamin B6 is converted into the coenzyme form pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP), which is used in
the metabolism of amino acids and lipids and is required for gluconeogenesis (the creation of glucose
from amino acids or fatty acids). PLP is also involved in the synthesis of neurotransmitters and
hemoglobin. PLP deficiency has been linked to type 1 diabetes.
     Vitamin B9 is converted into the coenzyme tetrahydrofolate (THF), which is involved in the
metabolism of nucleic acids and amino acids. THF is also necessary for normal cell division and for
the production of red blood cells. The relationship between dietary folate and autoimmune disease
remains unclear. Activated macrophages and some T cells involved in some autoimmune diseases do
have folate receptors in their cell membranes—this has been explored in psoriasis, rheumatoid
arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. A folate agonist called methotrexate is
a standard drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, but there are extensive side effects unless the
patients also supplement with folate or folic acid (see here). The use of this drug in other autoimmune
diseases has yielded mixed results. It appears as though the effects of methotrexate on the immune
system are independent of its antagonist ability (it inhibits the conversion of folate into THF), which
provides very little argument for either supplementation or avoidance of folate. By contrast, however,
an argument for ensuring adequate dietary intake of folate can be made by studies showing that low
folate is correlated with some autoimmune diseases.
      Vitamin B12 is the best-understood B vitamin in terms of its role in autoimmune disease. It has
the largest and most structurally complex molecular structure of all the vitamins and is essential for
the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids in every cell of the body. It is particularly
important for DNA synthesis and regulation, fatty acid synthesis, and energy production and plays a
key role in the production of blood cells, nerve sheaths, and proteins. Vitamin B12 is a group of four
very similar compounds. While the human body can convert one of these B12 compounds into another,
vitamin B12 can be synthesized from raw materials only by bacteria—meaning that food sources of
this vitamin are extremely important (our gut bacteria can make it but don’t seem to produce enough).
It is also important to note that vitamin B12 is found only in animal foods, such as fish, shellfish, and
meat (especially within the liver): the reason these foods contain B12 is that their gut bacteria produce
it. Vitamin B12 is a necessary factor for two important enzymes in the methyl cycle (see here):
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase
(MTR, also sometimes called methionine synthase). Adequate dietary intake of vitamin B12 is
especially important for those with mutations in the MTHFR gene. Vitamin B12 deficiency has been
found in patients with multiple sclerosis, celiac disease, autoimmune atrophic gastritis, and type 1
diabetes.


Minerals

Many minerals are necessary for life, including boron, calcium, chlorine, chromium, cobalt, copper,
fluorine, iodine, iron, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, phosphorous, potassium,
selenium, silicon, sodium, strontium, sulfur, and zinc (see here). Some of these minerals form the
backbone of important amino acids and enzymes. Some are important cofactors for enzymatic
processes (meaning that without them, those enzymes can’t perform their functions). Some are
necessary to activate or deactivate proteins or are necessary for communication between cells.
Deficiencies in certain minerals have been closely linked with autoimmune disease.

Copper. Copper is important for bone formation and maintenance, is necessary for the absorption and
utilization of iron, and is required (in conjunction with zinc and vitamin C) for connective tissue
formation. It is necessary for the production of RNA, phospholipids, and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP; the basic energy molecule of all cells) and for protein metabolism. Copper is required by the
immune system to support the production of some cytokines by T cells and regulate T-cell
proliferation (cell division), and dietary copper is important in resistance to infection. Copper
deficiency has been found in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and with pemphigus vulgaris.

Iodine. Iodine is important for the development and proper function of the thyroid and is an essential
component of thyroid hormones. The full extent of iodine’s role in the body remains unknown, but we
do know that it is an important antioxidant in mammary tissue and normalizes elevated adrenal
corticosteroid hormone secretion related to the stress response. (The link between cortisol and
autoimmune disease is discussed in chapter 3.) Iodine may also have a role in immune function
because phagocytosing (eating of pathogens) white blood cells produce various iodoproteins
(proteins containing iodine), including T4 thyroid prohormone.
     While both too much and too little iodine have been linked to autoimmune thyroid diseases, it’s
important to note the connection between iodine and selenium in terms of thyroid function. Too much
iodine inhibits thyroid hormone synthesis; however the body has an enzyme (sodium-iodide
symporter) whose job is to deal with excess iodine to restore thyroid function as quickly as possible.
Recent studies have shown that this enzyme cannot function if there is a deficiency is the
selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase, which means that the link between too much iodine and
autoimmune thyroid disease may actually be due to selenium deficiency (or at least, in part).

Iron. Iron is a critical component of hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells responsible for
carrying oxygen from the lungs to every other cell in the body. Specifically, iron is part of a molecule
called heme: four heme molecules are part of a hemoglobin protein, and it is the iron itself that binds
to oxygen. Hemoglobin is not the only protein in the body that contains heme. Heme is also a critical
component of a family of proteins involved in protection from oxidative damage. Iron is also needed
to metabolize B vitamins, is a necessary cofactor for a variety of enzymes, and is important in protein
metabolism. Of course, iron deficiency is a hallmark of autoimmune hemolytic anemia, autoimmune
aplastic anemia, and pernicious anemia. It has also been linked to rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune
gastritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and celiac disease.




Magnesium. More than three hundred different enzymes in your cells need magnesium to work,
including every enzyme that uses or synthesizes ATP and including enzymes that synthesize DNA and
RNA. It is also a constituent of bones and teeth, is important for neuromuscular contractions, and is
necessary in the production of testosterone and progesterone. It is important for the metabolism of
phosphorus, calcium, potassium, sodium, B-complex vitamins, and vitamins C and E. Magnesium is
also a cofactor in methylation (see here) and is necessary for detoxification functions.
     Importantly, magnesium depletion has been shown to have a profound impact on the thymus
gland (see here), which has implications for all autoimmune diseases. Higher levels of dietary
magnesium have also been correlated with decreased systemic inflammation in postmenopausal
women. (Recall that the thymus gland shrinks as we age.) Although links between magnesium
deficiency and autoimmune disease have not been extensively studied, a link to systemic lupus
erythematosus has been established.




Mineral Cheat Sheet
While deficiencies in all these minerals have not been explicitly linked to autoimmune disease,
we need adequate dietary intake of all of them.
          Boron: Boron supports bone health and is essential for the utilization of vitamin D and
          calcium in the body.
          Calcium: In addition to forming bone, calcium is essential to many processes within the
          cell, as well as neurotransmitter release and muscle contraction—including the beating of
          your heart!
          Chlorine: Chloride ions (a single chlorine atom with a net electric charge due to the loss
          of an electron) are required for the production of hydrochloric acid in the stomach and are
          important for electrolyte balance.


          Chromium: Chromium is important for sugar and fat metabolism.


          Copper: Copper is involved in the absorption, storage, and metabolism of iron and the
          formation of red blood cells.

          Iodine: Iodine is a constituent of thyroid hormones and thus has diverse essential roles in
          the body. It is also important for lactation and has roles in the immune system.

          Iron: Iron is a key component of hemoglobin, the protein in your blood that binds to
          oxygen and transports it throughout your body.

          Magnesium: Magnesium is necessary for cells to live. More than three hundred different
          enzymes in your cells need magnesium so they can work, including every enzyme that uses
          or synthesizes ATP (the basic energy molecule in a cell) and enzymes that synthesize DNA
          and RNA.
           Manganese: Manganese is necessary for enzymes that protect the body from and repair
           damage caused by free radicals.


           Molybdenum: Molybdenum is a necessary cofactor for key enzymes that perform
           detoxification functions in the liver.

           Phosphorus: Phosphorus plays a role in every metabolic reaction in the body and is
           important for the metabolism of fats, carbohydrates, and proteins.

           Potassium: Potassium is critical for the function of every cell; it is necessary for nerve
           function, cardiac function, and muscle contraction.

           Selenium: Selenium is required for the activity of twenty-five to thirty different enzymes
           (selenoenzymes) whose job is to protect the brain and other tissues from oxidative
           damage.

           Silicon: Silicon is required for the formation of connective tissues.

           Sodium: Sodium is necessary for electrolyte balance; for regulating blood pressure,
           volume, and pH; for controlling transition of fluids across cell membranes; and for neuron
           function.
           Sulfur: Sulfur is widely used in biochemical processes, is a component of all proteins,
           and is important for the function of many enzymes and antioxidant molecules. It is also
           critical for supporting liver detoxification functions.

           Zinc: Zinc plays a role in nearly every function of the cell. It is therefore necessary for
           every system in the body, including being essential for the immune system.

           Trace Minerals: A variety of other minerals—including gold, arsenic, cobalt, nickel,
           strontium, lithium, vanadium, tellurium, and even fluorine—are believed to have roles in
           the body, although exactly what they are remains a mystery.




Selenium. Selenium is a component of two unusual amino acids—selenocysteine and
selenomethionine. These amino acids are not used as building blocks for proteins but are added to
proteins during post-translational modifications (see here). Proteins containing one or more of these
amino acids are called selenoproteins, and they play a pivotal role in the antioxidant defense system
of the cells—every cell. Selenoproteins also play critical roles as catalysts for various enzymatic
reactions. Up to one hundred different selenoproteins are believed to exist, but only fifteen have been
well studied—all of which appear to be vital to human health.




Phytate and Mineral Absorption




All seeds (and indeed other plant parts as well, although in much smaller quantities) contain an
antinutrient called phytate. Phytate is the salt of phytic acid—that is, it is phytic acid bound to a
mineral. Within the seed, the primary function of phytic acid is as a storage molecule for phosphorus,
but it also serves as an energy store, as a source of cations (positive ions) for various chemical
reactions in the plant, and as a source of a cell wall precursor called myoinositol. Our bodies cannot
digest phytate.
     Grains and legumes are particularly high in phytates, which are concentrated in the outer layer
and the bran of the seeds. Because phytate is formed when phytic acid binds to minerals—typically
calcium, magnesium, iron, potassium, and zinc—these minerals are then unavailable to be absorbed
by the gut (which is why phytates are considered antinutrients). Therefore, the consumption of grains
and legumes can cause mineral deficiencies, especially when these phytate-rich foods displace other
mineral-rich foods in the diet.
     In addition, consumption of excessive phytates may irritate the lining of the gut and contribute to
a leaky gut (see here).



     The selenoprotein glutathione peroxidase (an enzyme that comes in four different varieties,
including a form called gastrointestinal glutathione peroxidase that is critical for protection from the
toxicity of ingested oxidized fats called lipid hydroperoxides) is a critical antioxidant found
throughout the body, inside cells, embedded in cell membranes, and outside cells (in the blood or in
the spaces between cells in tissue). Another selenoenzyme called thioredoxin reductase has a critical
role in cellular redox regulation. Many, many chemical processes (including the most basic use of
energy by cells) in the human body are redox reactions, meaning that they involve the transfer of
electrons from one molecule to another one. These transfers need to be tightly controlled, and
thioredoxin reductase is one of the enzymes that accomplishes this (by reducing the electron donor
thioredoxin). Very importantly, a buildup of thioredoxin (because of inadequate thioredoxin
reductase) has been linked to cancer growth. Another class of selenoproteins, called iodothyronine
deiodinases, are the enzymes that catalyze the conversion of the T4 thyroid prohormone (thyroxine) to
the active T3 thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine). The full activity of thyroid hormones is dependent
on this conversion, which then has profound impacts on cellular metabolism throughout the entire
body.
     Selenium is very important in several aspects of the immune system. Selenium deficiency
increases risk of viral infections, it appears to be essential for T-cell function (this has been best
studied in the context of HIV infection) and activation of neutrophils and natural killer cells, and it
protects against several inflammatory cytokines and modulates the production of several key
inflammation-signaling molecules. Selenium helps protect against the toxic effects from arsenic,
cadmium, and mercury. Selenium is important for absorption of vitamin E and has been shown to
prevent some forms of cancer, lower the risk of cardiovascular disease, and lower the risk of
complications in critical-care units.
     Not surprisingly, selenium deficiency has been intricately linked to autoimmune thyroid
disorders. Selenium supplementation has been intensely studied as a treatment for both Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis and Graves’ disease (with some success). Selenium deficiency has also been connected to
pemphigus vulgaris and lichen planus.




Is Salt Good or Bad?
Recent research has revealed that the higher the concentration of salt (sodium chloride, to be more
specific) in the diet, the greater the number of Th17 cells that are activated and the greater the amount
of proinflammatory cytokines that are secreted by those Th17 cells (causing generalized
inflammation). In a study of mice with multiple sclerosis, mice that were fed a high-salt diet had
significantly exacerbated symptoms, directly attributable to increases in Th17 cell differentiation
(maturation), proliferation (division), and activation. So a large amount of salt in the diet is probably
an important risk factor for autoimmune diseases through its stimulation of Th17 cells.
     However, sodium and chloride are essential minerals (see here). They are required for the
normal and healthy functioning of many systems in the body. Just as with other minerals, both too
much and too little cause problems. Furthermore, high-quality salt, such as Himalayan pink salt or
Celtic sea salt (sometimes called gray salt), is an important source of trace minerals (pink salt
typically contains more than eighty different minerals), including those known to be extremely
important for people with autoimmune disease, including iron, iodine, molybdenum, selenium, zinc,
and copper.
     By cutting out processed foods, fast food, and the vast majority of prepackaged foods while
following the Paleo Approach protocol, salt intake is vastly lower than on the typical Western diet.
For most people, this will automatically put their salt intake into a healthy range. I also suggest using
only pink or gray salt to cook with in order to benefit from the wealth of trace minerals these salts
contain, but still being mindful to use it in moderation.
Zinc. Zinc is the second most abundant metal in the body after iron, and is necessary for the activity of
approximately three hundred different enzymes. Not surprisingly, zinc has many important roles. It is
essential for DNA and RNA transcription (the “reading” of the DNA map to make proteins), and thus
controls gene expression and communication within cells, and is required for the production of
proteins. Zinc regulates apoptosis (programmed cell suicide, normal in a variety of circumstances). It
is important for absorption and activity of B vitamins, is required for muscle contraction, and is
needed in the production of insulin and testosterone. It is required for collagen formation, a healthy
immune system, and the body’s ability to heal from wounds. It is also an essential component of the
vitamin D receptor (what vitamin D binds to in cells), meaning that the actions of vitamin D are at
least in part dependent on zinc.
      Zinc has been shown to directly affect the immune system through control of T-cell development
and activation. It has also been shown to reduce cytokine production by Th1 and Th17 cells. Zinc
deficiency is arguably the most common micronutrient deficiency in autoimmune disease. It has been
linked to rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, pemphigus vulgaris, Alzheimer’s disease,
autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, autoimmune thyroid disease, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and type 1 diabetes. In all cases in which supplementation of zinc has been evaluated,
benefits have been observed, in some cases including dramatic reversal of the disease.
Fiber

One of the biggest changes in the Western diet over the last fifty years is the huge decrease in dietary
fiber as a percentage of carbohydrate intake. This shift from fiber-rich foods to refined carbohydrates
is the strongest correlate between diet and the rise in cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and
obesity (that’s right—refined carbohydrates, not saturated fat!). In fact, dietary fiber may be far more
important than the total amount of carbohydrates (which can be inferred from the high carbohydrate
intake in the first half of the twentieth century, when the percentage of fiber in the diet was also much
higher and disease rates were lower).




      Fiber is important. It regulates digestion and slows the release of insulin. It increases the
absorption of magnesium. It also may have an essential role in controlling systemic inflammation.
Fiber-rich diets have been shown to result in lower levels of inflammation. Remember those short-
chain fatty acids that our healthy gut bacteria produce as they digest the fiber we eat (see here)?
Short-chain fatty acids, such as acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid, are also anti-
inflammatory. They affect T cell populations and decrease inflammatory cytokine production in
response to antigen stimuli. These short-chain fatty acids also protect the gut from damage in
inflammatory bowel diseases and potentially prevent cancer (both in the gut and in the liver). In fact,
fiber contributes to happy and normal gut microflora.
      There are many kinds of fiber (just as there are many different types of sugar and starch
molecules). Fiber is broadly classified as either soluble, meaning that it dissolves in water, or
insoluble, meaning that it doesn’t dissolve in water. These two types of fiber impact digestion
differently and are typically associated with different health benefits.
Change in total carbohydrate consumption (–) and the percentage of carbohydrate from fiber (vertical
bars) in the United States between 1909 and 1997.

Reprinted with permission of L. S. Gross et al., “Increased Consumption of Refined Carbohydrates and the Epidemic of Type 2 Diabetes
in the United States: An Ecologic Assessment,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 79 (2004): 774–779.




Soluble fiber. Soluble fiber forms a gel-like material in the gut and tends to slow the movement of
material through the digestive system. Soluble fiber is typically readily fermented (although not all
forms of soluble fibers are fermentable) by the bacteria in the colon, producing gases and
physiologically active by-products (like short-chain fatty acids and vitamins), and can be prebiotic or
viscous or both. (Prebiotic just means that the fiber is fermentable; that is, it can feed probiotic gut
bacteria.) It has been shown to help lower blood cholesterol and regulate blood-glucose levels.

Insoluble fiber. Insoluble fiber tends to speed up the movement of material through the digestive
system. Most types of insoluble fibers are fermentable, also producing gases and physiologically
active by-products (like short-chain fatty acids and vitamins). Insoluble fiber increases stool bulk by
absorbing water as it moves through the digestive tract (which is believed to be very beneficial in
regulating bowel movements and managing constipation).

Does it matter which kind of fiber you eat? Most studies evaluating the impact of dietary fiber on
human health do not differentiate between soluble and insoluble but show that fiber in general is
beneficial. From the few studies that do differentiate between the two types, we know that a high
intake of insoluble fiber reduces the risk of colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, and diverticulitis and
correlates even more strongly with lower levels of C-reactive protein (a marker of inflammation)
than soluble fiber (which also lowers inflammation). There is also evidence that insoluble fiber can
improve insulin sensitivity (see here), can help regulate blood-sugar levels after eating, supports
reabsorption of bile acids (see here), and is essential for regulating hunger hormones, especially
ghrelin (see here). However, a great many studies on animals evaluating the health benefits of fiber
specifically look at inulin (which is a highly fermentable, fructose-rich, soluble fiber found in sweet
potatoes, coconuts, asparagus, leeks, onions, bananas, and garlic) and show that it reduces intestinal
permeability and regulates the immune system. For this reason, soluble fiber gets a lot of attention. In
contrast, studies also show that insoluble fiber can improve ulcerative colitis in animals, and there
are studies suggesting some potential negative health effects from very high intake of soluble fiber in
the absence of insoluble fiber. It may be that the health benefits of fiber are derived from whether the
fiber is fermentable (meaning that the bacteria in your gut can eat it) rather than whether it’s soluble
or insoluble. While soluble fiber typically is more readily fermentable, most soluble and insoluble
fibers are prebiotics. The medical literature currently offers no clear answer as to whether soluble or
insoluble fiber is more desirable. However, the wealth of studies showing health benefits to both
imply that each is required for optimal health.




A Note on Inulin Fiber
Inulin is the best-studied prebiotic fiber. (The sheer volume of studies evaluating inulin is the likely
reason why soluble fiber erroneously gets more attention than insoluble.) Inulin is highly indigestible
by our digestive enzymes and highly fermentable because of its high fructose content, which makes it
a great food for our gut microflora. (This also makes it a FODMAP;see here.) However, because it
is such a good food for our gut microflora, it can also contribute to bacterial and yeast overgrowth.
The most concentrated sources of inulin, which include chicory root, Jerusalem artichoke, and
coconut, are not explicitly excluded on the Paleo Approach plan, but caution with both frequency and
portion size is highly recommended, especially for people with symptoms of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth. Foods with added inulin and inulin supplements should absolutely be avoided.
Eating grains to get more fiber is like eating carrot cake to get more vegetables. There is far more
sugar in whole grains compared with vegetables and even fruit.



      So where do you get your fiber? We are accustomed to thinking that we have to eat “healthy
whole grains” to get our dietary fiber, but the truth is that grains do not have any more or better fiber
than fruits and vegetables. However, the ratio of sugars to fiber in grains is even greater than in fruit!
Yes, fruit has less sugar per gram of fiber than grains. (The detrimental effects of excess sugar and
starch are discussed here.) Rest assured that when you follow the Paleo Approach, you will be
getting plenty of fiber from a variety of fruits and vegetables. Supplementation with fiber is not
required and, indeed, not recommended.

Essential Fatty Acids

As already discussed, eating fat is required for the consumption and absorption of fat-soluble
vitamins, all of which are essential for the normal functioning of the immune system. It’s also
important to realize that fat itself is an essential nutrient—it is necessary for life—although what kind
of fat you eat does matter.
      Fat-phobia is rampant. For the last thirty-five years, we have been taught that eating fat makes
you fat, that saturated fat and cholesterol cause heart disease, and that whole-grain pasta is a better
choice! This is, in fact, the complete opposite of the truth, and I cannot emphasize enough the
importance of eating high-quality fats. One of the most detrimental effects of this misinformation is a
move away from healthy animal fats to processed vegetable oils. Why is this a problem? Because
these modern vegetable oils are all very high in omega-6 polyunsaturated fats.
     Let’s take a step backward and discuss exactly what fat is. Fat is composed of chains of fatty
acids. Fatty acids are the building blocks of fat, just as amino acids are the building blocks of protein
and monosaccharides are the building blocks of carbohydrates. There are many different fatty acids,
each with different effects on, and roles in, human health. A fatty acid has two components:
                    A hydrocarbon chain. This is a chain (the length of which varies for different
                     fats) of hydrocarbons (a carbon atom bonded with one to three hydrogen atoms).
                     Fatty acids tend to have an even number of hydrocarbons. Generally, the
                     hydrocarbon chain is a straight chain; however, a few fatty acids have branched
                     hydrocarbon chains, while others contain ring structures. The number of
                     hydrocarbons determines the length of the fatty acid, which can broadly be
                     classified as:


     short-chain: containing fewer than six hydrocarbons
     medium-chain: containing six to twelve hydrocarbons
     long-chain: containing thirteen to twenty-one hydrocarbons
     very-long-chain: containing twenty-two or more hydrocarbons


                   A carboxyl group. The carboxyl group, the molecular formula of which is COOH
                    (one carbon atom bound to two oxygen atoms and a hydrogen atom), is what
                    makes a fatty acid an acid. The carboxyl group is always at one end of the
                    hydrocarbon chain.




This is called the alpha end of the fatty acid.

     Beyond being categorized based on the length of the hydrocarbon chain, fatty acids are broadly
categorized as saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fats. These terms reflect the type of
molecular bond between the carbons in the hydrocarbon chain (and therefore also the number of
hydrogen atoms bound to each carbon atom).




Saturated fatty acids. A saturated fatty acid is one in which all the bonds between carbon atoms in
the entire hydrocarbon chain are single bonds (a simple molecular bond in which two adjacent atoms
share a single electron). The carbons are then also “saturated” with hydrogen atoms, meaning that
each carbon atom in the middle of the chain is bound to two hydrogen atoms and that the carbon at the
noncarboxyl-group end of the chain is bound to three hydrogen atoms.
This is called the omega end of the fatty acid.

     What’s special about saturated fatty acids is that they are very stable and not easily oxidized
(which means that they are not prone to react chemically with oxygen). Beyond making saturated fats
highly shelf-stable and excellent for even high-temperature cooking, this also means that eating them
does not contribute to oxidative stress in the body. They are also the easiest for the body to break
apart and use for energy. Saturated fats—like tallow, lard, butter, coconut oil, and palm oil—are
solid at room temperature.




Monounsaturated fatty acids. A monounsaturated fatty acid is one in which one of the bonds
between two carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain is a double bond (that is, a molecular bond in
which two adjacent atoms share two electrons). (This double bond also replaces two hydrogen
atoms.) If the double bond is in the middle of the hydrocarbon chain, each carbon atom on either side
of it is then bound to only one hydrogen atom, so the hydrocarbon chain is no longer “saturated” with
hydrogen. (If the double bond is at the noncarboxyl-group end of the chain—the omega end—the end
carbon atom is bound to two hydrogen atoms and the other carbon is bound to one hydrogen atom.)
The double bond can also put a kink or bend in the hydrocarbon chain, depending on where the
hydrogen atoms are located in relation to the bond. This bend is called a “cis” configuration and is
the most frequent configuration of double bonds found in fatty acids in nature. The other possible
configuration is a “trans” configuration, in which the hydrocarbon chain is not bent at the location of
the double bond. There are some naturally occurring trans fats, but not many. Monounsaturated fats
are less stable than saturated fat and are liquid at room temperature. They also require more enzymes
to break them apart in order to be used as energy than saturated fats do. Monounsaturated fats—like
olive oil and avocado oil—have been associated with diverse health benefits.




Polyunsaturated fatty acids. A polyunsaturated fatty acid is one in which two or more of the bonds
between carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain are double bonds (again, replacing hydrogen atoms in
the chain). Just like monounsaturated fats, these double bonds can create a bend in the cis
configuration or remain straight in the trans configuration. Polyunsaturated fats are easily oxidized,
meaning that they are prone to react chemically with oxygen. This reaction typically breaks the fatty
acid apart and produces oxidants (free radicals). When oxidized polyunsaturated fats are consumed, it
causes oxidative damage to the body. Polyunsaturated fats—like flaxseed oil, corn oil, and safflower
oil—which are liquid at room temperature, are most stable when stored in a dark and cool place
(both light and heat catalyze oxidation).
     Polyunsaturated fats are also broadly categorized as omega-3 fatty acids, omega-6 fatty acids,
and omega-9 fatty acids. These classifications relate to the location of the first double bond in
relation to the end of the hydrocarbon tail (yes, the omega end of the fatty acid). If the first double
bond is between the third and fourth carbon atoms, it’s an omega-3 fatty acid. If it’s between the sixth
and seventh, it’s an omega-6 fatty acid. And if it’s between the ninth and tenth, it’s an omega-9 fatty
acid.
      Fats are broken down into fatty acids in the digestive tract. Fatty acids are broken down in our
cells for energy. (This process is called beta-oxidation, which is performed by specialized enzymes
within each cell. Saturated fats are the easiest to break down.) Fatty acids are also used as building
blocks for structures within the human body, like the outer membranes of every cell. Importantly,
every cell contains a wide variety of enzymes that can convert one fatty acid to another, depending on
the requirements of the cell. The roles these different fatty acids play in inflammation and immunity
are discussed in detail here.
      There are only two essential fatty acids, both polyunsaturated, that the body cannot make itself:
alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), from which all other needed omega-3 fatty acids can be synthesized, and
linoleic acid (LA), from which all other needed omega-6 fatty acids can be synthesized. But, while
ALA and LA are designated as being the two essential fatty acids, all that is actually necessary is to
eat any fat with a double bond in the omega-3 position and any fat with a double bond in the omega-6
position. This is because the body can convert one omega-3 to another omega-3 fatty acid, and the
same with omega-6 fatty acids. ALA and LA get the honor of being called “essential” simply because
they are the two shortest omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, each being eighteen hydrocarbons long.
And, in fact, many experts believe that this designation is actually erroneous, since the longer-chain
omega-3 fatty acids EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) are far more
important biologically (see here) and the conversion of ALA into DHA or EPA is embarrassingly
inefficient.
      So which essential fatty acids are important in autoimmune disease? The Western diet is
incredibly deficient in omega-3 fatty acids. Period. However, it’s important to understand that dietary
insufficiency of omega-3s refers to an imbalance in the ratio between omega-3s and omega-6s. An
ideal ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids is somewhere between 1:1 and 4:1. However, typical
Western diets fall into a range between 10:1 and 25:1! This is largely thanks to processed seed oils,
grains, and the higher levels of omega-6 fatty acids that are present in the meat and dairy from grain-
fed animals. Studies evaluating the role of dietary omega-3 fatty acids in human health show that the
ratio to dietary omega-6 fatty acids is far more important than the actual quantity of these fats,
provided that you are eating enough fat to meet your basic needs. While some research evaluates the
exact ratio of omega-3s to omega-6s by controlling dietary intake of these fatty acids, most scientific
investigations have used supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids—typically the two long-chain
omega-3 fatty acids that our body actually uses, EPA and DHA. Only a handful of studies have
evaluated the different roles of EPA and DHA, which are discussed further here.



Examples of Common Fatty Acids
So What’s Wrong with Skinless, Boneless Chicken Breast?




The move to leaner meats to avoid saturated fats means that chicken has become the staple meat for
many people. Beyond robbing people of essential nutrients present in red meat and fish, it also
contributes to the skewed ratio of dietary omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids. Conventionally raised
chicken is actually much higher in omega-6 fatty acids than any other meat. While pasture-raised
chickens have lower levels of omega-6s (depending on what their diet is supplemented with), it is
natural for poultry to have a higher omega-6 content than other meats. Chicken and other poultry still
provide valuable nutrition and are not excluded from the Paleo Approach, but wild-caught fish and
shellfish; grass-fed beef, lamb, and bison; and pastured pork and wild game (if possible) are the
preferred sources of protein. (And don’t forget offal; see here.)



     The benefits of dietary supplementation with fish oils (which are high in DHA and EPA,
although the relative quantities vary) have been evaluated in several inflammatory and autoimmune
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, psoriasis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune-mediated glomerulonephritis, and migraine headaches
(which may or may not be linked to autoimmune disease). Benefits range from modest to dramatic, yet
are clearly in evidence.


Protein

Insufficient dietary protein has been linked to autoimmune disease only in the context of gross
malnutrition. And there have been no studies evaluating whether insufficiencies of certain amino
acids, for example, have any effect on the immune system. So it is impossible to draw any
conclusions about what a lack of complete protein in the diet may or may not mean in terms of
autoimmune disease. However, every cell in our bodies contains a huge variety of proteins, each with
a distinct function, and dietary protein supplies the building blocks required for all these proteins.
While not all twenty of the amino acids used to build these proteins are technically essential (in the
sense that they must come from food because the body cannot make them), they are all necessary for
our health, and the synthesis of one amino acid from another is often an inefficient process (see here).




     Protein is required for healing, and the easiest way for the body to heal is if all twenty amino
acids are consumed in the diet. This can be accomplished only by consuming animal foods, including
meat, poultry, fish, and shellfish. (You could eat insects, too, if you enjoy them.) This also includes
eating every part of the animal because different amino acids are present in different quantities in
different tissues (see here). Just as you don’t want to eat only hamburgers when it comes to meat, it is
important to eat skin, organs, joint tissue, and bones (typically in the form of bone broth). It is also
important ecologically to make sure that nothing is wasted, and it is a very economical way to eat as
well. The phrase “You are what you eat” actually does apply. The basic building blocks that your
body needs to heal are typically found in the part of the animal that corresponds to the part of your
body that needs healing. That isn’t to say that if you have a skin condition, you should eat only pork
rinds. Rather, we need to understand the importance of including meats rich in connective tissues
(like skin, but also bones and cuts of meat like cheek) in our diet.


Food for Thought

Some mineral excesses can look like autoimmune disease. For example, excessive molybdenum can
cause gout, form deposits in soft tissues and joints, and trigger symptoms that mimic arthritis.
Excessive molybdenum can also cause copper deficiency and hence anemia, diarrhea, and retarded
growth in children (symptoms that may be misdiagnosed as autoimmune in origin). Mineral excesses
may also be linked to some autoimmune diseases. High iodine levels are sometimes seen in patients
with autoimmune thyroid disorders. High copper levels have been shown in patients with multiple
sclerosis. Every micronutrient has a healthy range: too little can negatively impact health, but too
much can, too.
     There is also important synergy between different micronutrients. They all work together, and
the proper ratios among them are required for the body to function optimally. An excess of one
micronutrient may be the direct result of a deficiency in another. For some micronutrients, getting the
appropriate amounts relative to the others is far more important than getting “enough” or “too much.”
But when you eat a variety of whole, nutrient-dense foods, you get what you need.
     Overdoing one micronutrient can be harmful, which is why I do not generally support
supplementation, especially if you have not had your levels tested. Certainly, targeted
supplementation under the guidance of a health care professional with routine reviews can be useful
for some micronutrient deficiencies—especially if you are just starting out on your healing journey,
and particularly for those with celiac or inflammatory bowel diseases in which severe malabsorption
is common. (Supplementation is discussed in more detail in chapter 8.) A better strategy for most
people is to consume foods that are rich in the specific micronutrients they are deficient in as part of a
complete diet full of a variety of nutrient-dense whole foods. If you have diagnosed micronutrient
deficiencies, the nutrient tables (see here) will help you choose foods rich in those micronutrients so
you can address those deficiencies naturally and safely.
     But let me be clear: for most people, simply eating a diet rich in nutrient-dense whole foods will
provide all the vitamins and minerals required for health, in the appropriate quantities relative to one
another for optimal absorption and use by the body. So while nutrient deficiency is definitely a
contributing factor to autoimmune disease, focusing on individual micronutrients when you follow the
Paleo Approach is rarely necessary.
Foods That Cause a Leaky Gut and Gut Dysbiosis

As discussed in chapter 1, it is now believed that a leaky gut or gut dysbiosis is necessary for
autoimmune disease to develop. That means that if you have a healthy gut barrier and healthy gut
microflora, other environmental triggers and genetics are irrelevant. Diet and lifestyle factors that
contribute to a leaky gut and gut dysbiosis are the most important focus of all the recommendations in
The Paleo Approach. And the key is to avoid foods that are known to irritate and damage the gut and
foods that are known to contribute to gut dysbiosis.
      Fortunately, these foods can be tied up into a neat package. Anyone who is already familiar with
the Paleo diet knows that grains, pseudo-grains, legumes, and dairy products all contribute to a leaky
gut and gut dysbiosis. These foods are also the most nutritionally poor foods in the Western diet. Yes,
as was already discussed in this chapter, grains contain less (and often much, much, much less) of
every vitamin and almost every mineral compared with vegetables. Dairy products are high in only a
handful of nutrients, all of which are also readily available in meat and vegetables, which contain a
far greater density and variety of other nutrients as well. Legumes, which are often recommended as a
meat alternative, do not offer anywhere near the same nutritional punch as animal proteins. Grains and
legumes are also high in omega-6 polyunsaturated fats, contributing to the gross imbalance between
omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids in the Western diet. When grains, legumes, and dairy products are
consumed daily, our diets become much less nutritionally dense, which results in nutrient
deficiencies. Worse, these foods also damage the gut and support overgrowth of bacteria and yeast in
the small intestine. There should be no place for these foods in our diets.
      Because those with autoimmune disease are more susceptible to developing a leaky gut and to
intense immune responses to the contents that leak out of the gut, some other foods must also be
avoided, including all nuts and seeds, and vegetables from the nightshade family, which will be
discussed shortly.
      Grains, pseudo-grains, legumes, dairy, nuts, seeds, and nightshades all contain substances that
either directly increase the permeability of the gut (either by damaging the enterocytes or by opening
the tight junctions between them) or indirectly increase the permeability of the gut (by feeding
overgrowth of bacteria and yeast in the small intestine). These harmful substances include lectins
(specifically prolamins and agglutinins), digestive-enzyme inhibitors, saponins (especially
glycoalkaloids), and phytic acid.

Lectins

One of the core principles of a Paleo diet is avoiding what are sometimes called lectins, sometimes
toxic lectins. The term toxic lectin originates from the fact that lectins are a class of carbohydrate-
binding proteins found in all foods (and indeed all forms of life), but that only a subset of these are an
issue for human health (hence lectins versus toxic lectins). The lectins that are of concern have two
important properties: they are difficult to digest, and they are known to interact strongly with the
brush border of the intestine (see here). There are two main classes of these toxic lectins: prolamins
and agglutinins.
     The consumption of toxic lectins is associated with many diseases (not just autoimmune
disease). This is because these proteins can increase intestinal permeability (cause a leaky gut) and
can activate the immune system. The foods that contain these proteins, such as the seeds of grasses
(i.e., grains) and legumes, have been a substantial part of the human diet only since the Agricultural
Revolution, ten to fifteen thousand years ago. Two factors had to work together to make that possible:
fire for cooking (which had already been around for hundreds of thousands of years) and agriculture
(the discovery that the seeds of plants could be saved and planted in a controlled way).
       Agriculture allowed humans to form larger, stable communities, which eventually became
villages, towns, and cities. These larger communities enabled us to share knowledge and discoveries;
it also led to the division of labor, which prompted the advance of technologies (from the wheel to
the iPhone). Agriculture is the source of civilization, and it is what has allowed humans to live the
comfortable, technology-based modern lifestyles we enjoy today. Even though the consumption of
grains is probably responsible for most, if not all, of the noncommunicable diseases we face as a
civilization today, we can still appreciate the fact that agriculture was the driving force behind the
development of modern humans (yes, that means us).
       The lectins in grains, legumes, and pseudo-grains aren’t toxic enough to make most of us
severely ill immediately after eating them (otherwise, humans never would have domesticated them!).
Rather, their effects are subtle and can take years to manifest as disease. In addition, people react to
these foods in different ways. For some, the detrimental effects are severe and show up early in life
(celiac disease being an excellent example). Others can eat these foods forever and never overtly feel
any ill effects. Most people probably fall somewhere between these extremes: the detrimental effects
of the grains are so subtle that they never make the connection between health issues they might be
having and the food they’re eating. For example, eating glutenous grains has been linked to obesity,
which in itself is linked to a higher risk of a whole host of diseases. But someone who is overweight
and otherwise healthy may not think that gluten has anything to do with it. Genetic susceptibility does
play a crucial role in terms of sensitivity to these foods. Some of the ways lectins can be harmful
affect only individuals with certain genes (typically the genes that also predispose them to
autoimmune disease). But in several ways, lectins are harmful to everyone.
       So let’s talk about prolamins and agglutinins—the two most problematic types of lectins.
Understanding just how these proteins cross and damage the gut barrier is essential for understanding
just how crucial it is to omit the foods that contain them from your diet—forever.




What Are Grains?
Grains are the seeds of grasses and include:


    barley
    corn (aka maize)
    fonio
    job’s tears
    kamut
    millet
    oats
    rice
    rye
    sorghum
    spelt
    teff
    triticale
    wheat (all varieties, including einkorn, durum, and semolina)
    wild rice




What Are Pseudo-Grains?
Pseudo-grains are the starchy seeds of broad-leafed plants, including:


    amaranth
    buckwheat
    chia
    quinoa




                                 What Are Legumes?




Legumes are members of the pea family (Fabaceae or Leguminosae). Often just the bean is
consumed, but sometimes it is consumed with the pod, as in the case of snow peas or green
beans. Legumes include:


    alfalfa
    carob
     chickpea
     clover
     common bean
     fava bean
     field pea or garden pea
     lentil
     lima bean
     lupin
     mesquite
     mung bean
     peanut
     pigeon pea
     rooibos
     runner bean
     soybean


The problematic substances in legumes are present in the highest concentration in the seed (or bean)
itself but are also found in the sprouts. Mature leaves (such as pea leaves, which might be consumed
in a salad, or rooibos tea, which is made from steeping the leaves of the rooibos bush) or pods
without the bean (as in the case of most carob powder and some mesquite flour) are generally safe to
consume. Also, any legume that is traditionally eaten raw or with the pod, such as peas, green beans,
snow peas, sugar snap peas, and scarlet runner beans, are typically well tolerated by those with a
healthy gut and can be included in your diet after you see a substantial alleviation of your disease
symptoms.




Prolamins (aka Glutenoids)

Prolamins are abundant in grains, legumes, and pseudo-grains (more specifically in the seed of the
plant, which includes wheat, oats, barley, quinoa, rice, peanuts, and soy). Gluten is the best-known
example of a prolamin, the most thoroughly studied, and is the most dangerous. Recently, the term
glutenoid has been coined to emphasize the connection between other members of this protein family
and the effects of gluten. Much of the current understanding of the effect that prolamins have on the gut
barrier, but also on the overall immune system, comes from studies of gluten (and more specifically
one protein component of gluten called gliadin), often conducted in the context of celiac disease.
Although glutenoid has yet to catch on, when it does it may be easier for people to understand that
there are similar proteins in nongluten-containing grains as well as pseudo-grains and legumes that
are similarly problematic for health.
     Prolamins function as storage proteins in plants and are the major source of important proteins
for seed germination. In fact, prolamins account for approximately half the total protein in all grains.
There are many different prolamins, all characterized by their high content of the amino acid proline.
Examples of prolamins are gliadin in wheat (when you break apart the quaternary structure of gluten,
you mainly get gliadin proteins and glutenin proteins; see here), hordein in barley, secalin in rye, zein
in corn, kafirin in sorghum, orzenin in rice, and avenin in oats.




Prolamins are also high in the amino acid glutamine and are soluble only in concentrated-alcohol
solutions.

      Usually food proteins are degraded into very small peptides or individual amino acids by
digestive enzymes (called peptidases or proteases) before they are transported across the gut
epithelium. However, prolamins are not completely broken down in the normal digestive process,
both because the structure of these proteins is not compatible with our digestive enzymes (which are
not good at breaking apart proline-rich proteins into individual amino acids) and because the seeds
that contain prolamins also contain protease inhibitors (compounds that stop our enzymes from
breaking down proteins, a part of the seed’s natural defense mechanisms, discussed more on see
here). Therefore, many prolamin fragments travel though the digestive tract but are also able to cross
the gut barrier largely intact and, in doing so, damage the barrier and cause a leaky gut.
      Most of the current understanding of how prolamins cross and damage the gut barrier comes
from studies of various gliadin fragments (which are commonly formed when gluten is partially
digested by our proteases). Several fragments of gliadin have been well characterized in terms of
their effect on the gut barrier and their ability to activate both the innate and the adaptive immune
systems. Gliadin fragments can cross the gut barrier through one of two pathways:
                     Paracellular—in between the cells that line the gut
                     Transcellular—through the cells that line the gut (which encompasses two
                      routes)

     In some people, one route or the other will dominate (probably dependent on genetic factors).
For others, both pathways are important contributors to a leaky gut. And while it doesn’t really matter
which way prolamins are causing your gut to be leaky, understanding these pathways is important for
grasping the necessity of avoiding grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes.

Paracellular Pathway. As discussed in chapter 1, gluten is known to open up the tight junctions
between enterocytes (at least in genetically susceptible individuals; see here). This occurs through an
increase in zonulin production by the gut enterocytes, stimulated by gluten exposure (more
specifically by binding of certain gliadin fragments with a receptor in the enteroctye cell membrane
called chemokine (C-X-C) receptor type 3, or CXCR3). Recall that zonulin is a protein secreted into
the gut by the enterocytes that regulates the rapid opening and closing of tight junctions to allow for
the absorption of specific nutrients in healthy individuals. People with celiac disease are known to
have increased zonulin levels, stimulating the opening of more tight junctions and probably keeping
them open longer. When the tight junctions are opened, contents inside the gut can cross the gut barrier
helter-skelter. These contents then encounter gut-associated lymphoid tissue and stimulate cells of
both the innate and the adaptive immune system. The production of cytokines and the stimulation of
inflammation can cause damage to gut enterocytes (which are innocent bystanders of these nonspecific
responses of the innate immune system), thereby causing a leaky gut. Furthermore, many of the
proteins that leak out of the gut provide the opportunity for autoantibody formation.




Paracellular pathway.


Transcellular Pathways. There are two transcellular pathways—retrotranscytosis and lysosomal.
Retrotranscytosis of gliadin has only recently been identified and thus far has been studied only in the
context of celiac disease. The mechanisms of retrotranscytosis are not necessarily limited to celiac
disease, however, and could occur in anyone with gluten intolerance and iron deficiency. Lysosomal
pathways are also not limited to those with gluten antibodies or genetic susceptibilities.
     Retrotranscytosis. IgA antibodies produced by B cells in gut-associated lymphoid tissue are
normally transported from the basolateral side of the gut enterocytes (the side facing inside the body)
to the apical side of the gut enterocytes (the side facing inside the gut) and into the gut lumen (the
space inside the gut). This is called transcytosis (which basically means transportation across a cell).
IgA antibodies perform a variety of functions in the brush border and lumen of the intestine, including
what is called immune exclusion, which is the interference with the ability of antigens (including
viruses, bacteria, bacterial toxins, and certain enzymes) to adhere to and penetrate the gut barrier. IgA
antibodies are then recycled by a mechanism called retrotranscytosis; that is, they are transported
from the apical to the basolateral side of the cell, or from inside the gut back into the body. In
addition to allowing for the recycling of these IgA antibodies, retrotranscytosis allows for antigen
presentation (see here) from inside the gut to the immune system in a very controlled way.
Importantly, retrotranscytosis may protect the gut enterocytes from viral and bacterial infection (by
binding to antigens inside the cells) and thereby preserve the integrity of the gut barrier. Also, IgA
retrotranscytosis is a form of protected transport across the cell, meaning that the IgA antibodies are
not degraded or modified as they cross the cell (which occurs with many other forms of transport
across the cell, such as lysosomal transport, discussed shortly).
Transcellular pathways.

      IgA antibodies produced against gliadin bind to specific gliadin fragments in the intestinal lumen
and form a stable complex. This IgA-gliadin complex fits into a specific receptor (called the
transferrin receptor, which is normally used for the absorption of iron) in the apical membrane of the
gut enterocytes. The complex is retrotranscytosed, and this causes intact gliadin fragments to be
delivered to the basolateral side of the cell, where they can activate the immune system. This
retrotranscytosis of gliadin has been well characterized in the context of celiac disease. Once across
the cell, the gliadin fragments are delivered to the gut-associated lymphoid tissue to stimulate the
innate and adaptive immune systems. Again, the resulting production of cytokines and stimulation of
inflammation can cause damage to gut enterocytes, thereby causing a leaky gut.
      Where do these IgA antibodies against gliadin come from? No one knows, but high levels of
these gliadin-specific serum IgA antibodies in the intestinal lumen are found not only in individuals
with active celiac disease, but also in healthy individuals. Importantly, there is an abnormally high
number of transferrin receptors, which transport the IgA-gliadin complex into the cell, in the gut
enterocytes of celiac disease patients. The increase in transferrin receptors may be caused by iron
deficiency (iron-deficiency anemia is extremely common in celiac disease), forming yet another link
to micronutrient deficiency (see here).
      When gliadin crosses the gut barrier by retrotranscytosis, it is basically exploiting a normal
recycling pathway and mechanism meant to protect the cells of the gut barrier from being damaged by
infectious organisms.
      Lysosomal Transport. Even in healthy individuals, gliadin fragments are taken up by
enterocytes through a process called endocytosis. Endocytosis is a normal function of all cells in the
body by which they absorb molecules (such as long proteins that cannot enter the cells through the
cell membrane or through specific transporters embedded in the cell membrane) by engulfing them
(and other compounds) in a membranous structure (sort of like a bubble whose surface is made of
membrane that was part of the outer cell membrane before endocytosis). These “bubbles” are called
endosomes, and they enable the cell to sort and recycle proteins in a targeted way. (Protein recycling
is a very important function for every cell since it allows proteins to be reused, which is more
efficient that building new proteins.)
Tissue Transglutaminase: Another Link Between Gluten and
Autoimmune Disease




One antibody commonly formed in response to dietary gluten targets our enzyme tissue
transglutaminase (tTG, or transglutaminase 2 or TG2). In fact, secretion of IgA antibody against tTG
is considered a hallmark of celiac disease. But anti-tTG antibodies (either IgA or IgG) are not unique
to celiac disease; they have also been isolated in people with dermatitis herpetiformis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and type 1 diabetes. These autoantibodies are formed through a different process than the
more usual molecular mimicry (where an antibody formed against an antigen just happens to also bind
to one of our proteins; see here).
      Tissue transglutaminase is an essential enzyme in every cell of the body: it makes important
modifications to proteins as they are produced inside the cell. Specifically, tTG belongs to a family
of calcium-dependent enzymes that catalyze two protein modifications: transamidation and
deamidation.
      Tissue-transglutaminase activity is increased in the lining of the gut in response to gluten
consumption. (Zinc deficiency may also be a necessary contributor to this increase; see here.) When
that happens, tTG works to catalyze the deamidation (a protein modification in which an amide is
removed from the protein, typically a step in protein degradation) of specific proline-rich areas of
gluten protein fragments (gliadin or gliadin fragments). As a result of this activity, a complex is
formed between tTG and the partly modified gliadin. And for reasons that remain elusive, this
gliadin-tTG complex is presented in the major histocompatibility complex as an antigen to the
adaptive immune system (see here). T cells then secrete cytokines that stimulate the B cells to
produce antibodies against both gliadin and tTG (see here).
      One problem is that increased tTG activity increases the likelihood of immune activation and
production of antibodies against gluten (specifically gliadin). However, tTG antibodies are probably
a problem as well. Tissue transglutaminase stimulates wound healing, but if antibodies have formed
against it, when it is secreted by damaged cells in inflamed areas of the small intestine (or any other
damaged tissue in the body), rather than helping to heal the surrounding tissue, it instead turns it into a
target of the immune system. This is yet another way in which gluten can cause a leaky gut. In fact, the
formation of antibodies against tTG is known to inhibit intestinal-epithelial-cell differentiation
(maturation), induce intestinal-epithelial-cell proliferation (division), increase epithelial
permeability (in the gut but also in other epithelial barriers in the body, such as the lungs and skin),
activate inflammatory cells (monocytes in particular), and disrupt angiogenesis (the process of
growing new blood vessels, which is necessary for healing). Importantly, when antibodies against
tTG form, every cell and organ in the body becomes a potential target.
     Adopting a gluten-free diet reduces tTG autoantibodies and concurrently decreases circulating
CD4+ T cells, implying that gluten consumption, tTG-antibody formation, and activation of the
immune system may be connected.
     While the effect of other prolamins on tTG-antibody formation has not yet been explored, it is
important to note that tTG antibodies form in response to gluten because of its proline content—so
tTG-antibody formation is a possibility in reaction to all prolamins in grains, legumes, and pseudo-
grains. In this case, genetic susceptibility is a contributor: two gene variants of the HLA gene (see
here) have been shown to make anti-tTG-antibody formation much more likely.



      There are different types of endosomes. In this case, endocytosed proteins are held within a type
of endosome called a lysosome. Lysosomes contain enzymes (called lysosomal-acid proteases) that
can break proteins apart into individual amino acids. Lysosomes then travel to the basolateral
membrane (the side of the cell facing inside the body rather than inside the gut), where the contents of
the lysosome can be exocytosed (which is the opposite of endocytosis, in which the contents are
secreted out of the cell and the lysosome membrane can integrate back into the outer cell membrane).
Even though the proteins are traveling from the apical side of the cell to the basolateral side of the
cell, this is transcytosis (because this is the normal direction of transport across the cell for these
proteins). In many healthy individuals, gliadin peptides can be fully digested within the lysosomes,
but this is not the case for those with celiac disease. It is unknown what percentage of gliadin
peptides may remain undigested through this process in those with autoimmune disease.




Lysosomes also provide protein fragments to the MHC for presentation to the immune system; see
here.

      There is also evidence that lysosomal damage may occur in response to gliadin fragments.
(Interestingly, casein, a milk protein, does the same thing.) If a lysosome is damaged, not only do the
still-intact gliadin fragments enter the cell cytoplasm, but so do the enzymes within the lysosome,
which can then attack proteins within the cell, damaging and probably killing the cell. Basically, if a
lysosome is damaged while digesting and transporting proteins across the cell, the release of the
contents of the lysosome within the cell causes the cell to die. A damaged or dead cell opens up a
hole through which other components of the gut can leak into the body and activate the immune
system. This is one mechanism by which gliadin (and casein) can cause a leaky gut, even in healthy
individuals who have no gluten sensitivity or intolerance. It is unknown if a dietary threshold exists
for this lysosomal damage to occur or whether such a threshold could vary depending on genetic or
other factors.
     An additional effect of the lysosomal pathway is the stimulation of inflammation through the
production of oxidants. The accumulation of specific gliadin fragments within the lysosomes causes
an increase in the production of reactive oxygen species (oxidants; see here) without causing damage
to the lysosome. Although not all the details of this process are understood, some of the signaling
pathways have been uncovered, and it appears that some gliadin fragments stimulate signals known to
drive inflammation. The production of oxidants can also cause damage to the cell, which may result in
alterations in cell morphology (that is, cell shape, which also affects cell function) and cell division
(proliferation), and may affect cell viability and cause apoptosis (programmed cell suicide). And
again, damage or enterocyte cell death leaves a hole in the gut barrier.
     Another damaging effect of lysosomal transport of gliadin fragments is the mobilization of
intracellular calcium-ion stores, which causes endoplasmic-reticulum stress (because the
endoplasmic reticulum contains the highest concentration of calcium ions within the cell, and it cannot
function properly if it loses them). The endoplasmic reticulum is the organelle within every cell
responsible for protein synthesis, lipid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, and detoxification.
When it is stressed, it can’t do its job efficiently. Calcium ions are mobilized in response to gliadin
fragments in the intact lysosome, although we don’t yet know quite how. In the context of celiac
disease, this production of oxidants and the mobilization of calcium ions drive the initial increase in
tissue transglutaminase (see here). And importantly, when endoplasmic-reticulum stress is severe or
prolonged, cell death (via apoptosis) occurs. Again, this causes a hole in the gut barrier. As in the
case of lysosomal damage, it is unknown whether dietary thresholds or genetic predisposition are
factors; however, both of these mechanisms appear to apply generally. The generation of reactive
oxygen species and calcium-ion mobilization may also be the result of specific gliadin fragments
entering the cell via retrotranscytosis.
     What’s the takeaway here? There are many ways the prolamin gliadin (a protein component of
gluten) can cross and damage the gut barrier, even in people without a genetic susceptibility to a
leaky gut and even in people without diagnosed gluten sensitivity. Whether by paracellular or
transcellular pathways, once inside the body, these protein fragments interact with the gut-associated
lymphoid tissue, stimulating the release of inflammatory cytokines and activating cells of both the
innate and adaptive immune systems.
     Gliadin can cause damage and death of gut enterocytes in a variety of ways, all of which result
in holes in the gut barrier through which various contents of the gut can leak out. Inflammation is
triggered by gliadin fragments that cross the gut barrier, as well as by other partly digested food
proteins, gut bacteria, bacterial fragments, and waste products or toxins likewise crossing over. This
further activates the immune system, causing a vicious cycle of inflammation and gut-barrier damage.




How Long Does It Take to Heal from Gluten Exposure?
As previously explained, gut enterocytes are organized into hills and valleys (to help maximize the
surface area of the gut), forming fingerlike columns of cells called villi, which are separated by
valleys called crypts (see here). The enterocytes are constantly regenerating themselves. (A pool of
resident stem cells supplies the new enterocytes.) As the cells age, they migrate higher up the villi
and are eventually shed into the gut to be redigested. (Yes, we are constantly cannibalizing
ourselves.) This is called the “turnover” of the gut epithelium. In a normal, healthy gut, the enterocytes
have a life span of one to six days (most typically two to three), meaning that this is how long it takes
for all the villi cells to be replaced. (This gets slower as we age.) The cells that migrate toward the
bottom of the crypts have a life span of two to three weeks (and are called Paneth cells). This means
that a healthy person has an entirely new intestinal lining every two to three weeks.
      Repairing the intestine (because it’s been damaged by ingested toxins, infection, or some other
agent) is a very involved and complex process that is tightly regulated and controlled by the body.
The healing time varies depending on the extent of injury: studies trying to understand the role of the
gut’s resident stem cells show that repair of the crypt and villi structure of the intestinal wall after
injury can take anywhere from two to twelve weeks (depending on whether the stem cells themselves
are injured) in the absence of other factors that might slow healing.
      What does this mean? For healthy individuals, the damage to individual cells and the tight
junctions between them that gluten and other prolamins can cause heals relatively quickly—anywhere
from a few days to three weeks. For them, most of this time is probably asymptomatic. Many people
following gluten-free or Paleo diets report symptoms that last from only a couple of hours to a couple
of days after accidental gluten exposure.
      For those with confounding factors that undermine the body’s efforts to repair, healing takes
longer. These confounding factors are numerous and include gluten intolerance or sensitivity,
uncontrolled inflammation in the gut, nutritional deficiencies, gut dysbiosis, infections, stress,
bodywide inflammation, and chronically elevated insulin—all of which hinder the healing process.
Most, if not all, of these factors are at play in autoimmune disease.
      How much do these factors slow healing? The extreme end of the spectrum is those with celiac
disease, one hallmark of which is a shortening or blunting of the intestinal villi (observable by
performing a biopsy of the small intestine). Intestinal villi are typically three to five times longer in
healthy individuals than in those with celiac disease. One study showed that only 66 percent of celiac
patients had normal villi structure after five years of a strict gluten-free diet. This means that even
after five years, 34 percent of celiac disease sufferers had not recovered. Unfortunately, this implies a
long, slow road to recovery for many. However, these studies were performed with gluten-free diets,
not with Paleo Approach diets, so many suboptimal and even harmful foods were probably being
consumed. And even though healing is a gradual process, improvements in symptoms are typically
seen fairly early and continue throughout the healing process. While there is no way to estimate how
long it will take your body to heal while following the Paleo Approach, anecdotal reports suggest that
it will be faster.



     How important is genetic susceptibility? Certainly it is involved in the zonulin response to
gliadin. Although the role that genetic factors play in enterocyte damage caused by transport through
the gut enterocytes remains unstudied, genetic predisposition may explain the variability in the
severity of the damage caused by wheat consumption. It is likely that some damage is caused to the
gut barrier of everyone who consumes wheat, but genes might explain why some people suffer from a
severely leaky gut or autoimmune disease in response to wheat consumption, while others seem to
tolerate wheat without experiencing any overt health issues.




Gluten Cross-Reactivity and Contamination




While it remains unknown what fraction of those with autoimmune disease have immunologic
reactions to gluten (that is, form antibodies against gliadin), some researchers and medical
professionals believe that gluten sensitivity may be ubiquitous among autoimmune disease sufferers.
Certainly, there are compelling reasons to avoid gluten, and indeed all grains. One additional area of
concern, especially for those with celiac disease and gluten intolerance, but perhaps for anyone with
autoimmune disease, is gluten cross-reactive foods.
     Just as the antibodies the body synthesizes against a pathogen or food protein may also recognize
proteins in the body (which is known as molecular mimicry or antibody cross-reactivity and results in
autoantibody formation; see chapter 1), antibodies formed against a protein in one food may also
recognize proteins in another food. This appears to be particularly common with gluten. A recent
study measuring the ability of antigliadin antibodies to bind to proteins from twenty-five other foods
found that these antibodies also reacted with dairy proteins (casein, casomorphin, butyrophilin, and
whey—this may explain the high frequency of dairy sensitivities in celiac patients), oats, brewer’s
and baker’s yeast, instant coffee, sorghum, millet, corn, rice, and potatoes. While not all people with
gluten intolerance will also be intolerant to all these foods, these foods do come with a high-risk
warning in terms of stimulating the immune system.
      And gluten contamination is common in the food supply: many grains and flours that are
inherently gluten-free may still contain gluten. There are multiple opportunities for gluten to
contaminate these foods during growth and production. Some crops are grown in rotation with wheat
crops (soy and oats are common). Because they share the same field in different years, some wheat
may grow within the crop as a weed and find its way into the finished product. Other sources of
contamination include shared equipment for harvesting, storage, transport, and processing. Commonly
contaminated grain products include millet, white rice flour, buckwheat flour, sorghum flour, and soy
flour. As these are commonly used in commercial gluten-free baked goods, extreme caution should be
exercised.



      Prolamins also contribute to gut dysbiosis, which, as discussed in chapter 1, can cause a leaky
gut all by itself. Not only are prolamins inherently difficult for our bodies to digest, but they interfere
with important digestive enzymes in the brush border of the intestine. In particular, gliadin is known
to inhibit the activity of three important enzymes: lactase, sucrase, and dipeptidyl peptidase 4. These
enzymes are important for breaking down sugars into monosaccharides and proteins into amino acids
for transport across the enterocyte barrier (lactase breaks apart lactose; sucrase breaks apart sucrose;
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 has diverse functions related to digestion, metabolism, and immune
regulation). This may have a profound effect on gut dysbiosis—overgrowth in particular—because
the inhibition of these enzymes means more food for gut bacteria farther down the digestive tract. In
fact, studies of mice fed either gluten-containing or gluten-free diets show much higher levels of gut
bacteria in the mice fed a diet that contained gluten.
      While a variety of factors contribute to gut dysbiosis, poor digestion—owing to lack of either
digestive enzymes or stomach acid (see here) or because the foods consumed are inherently difficult
to digest (because of, say, the prolamins in grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes)—is a very common
cause. When foods are not digested and absorbed by our bodies, the surplus feeds intestinal bacteria,
allowing them to become excessive, which is a form of gut dysbiosis. In addition, prolamin-rich
foods feed only certain species of gut bacteria, so only certain strains increase in number, leading to
an imbalance of bacterial species, which is another form of gut dysbiosis. When certain strains of
bacteria grow excessively, the overgrowth typically starts in the large intestine, but it is only a matter
of time before it migrates up into the ileum (the last segment of the small intestine) and, in extreme
cases, into the jejunum and the duodenum (the first two segments of the small intestine) and even the
stomach.
   How to Avoid Wheat/Gluten
Avoiding gluten can take some effort. Ingredients derived from wheat and other gluten-
containing grains can be found in the vast array of packaged and manufactured foods, but also
in some ingredients not normally considered to be processed foods. The following list includes
some of these hidden—and not-so-hidden—sources of gluten.


     Asian rice paper                      imitation fish




     atta flour                            kamut




     bacon (check ingredients)             lunch meats




     barley                                maida (Indian wheat flour)




     barley grass                          malt




     barley malt                           malt vinegar




     beer (unless gluten-free)             marinades




     bleached or unbleached flour          matzah (aka matso)
bran               mir (a wheat and rye cross)




                   nutritional and herbal supplements (may contain
bread flour
                   gluten)




breading           oats




brewer’s yeast     panko (bread crumbs)




bulgur             pilafs (containing orzo)




coating mixes      prepared foods (often contain gluten)




communion wafers   processed cereals




condiments         rye




couscous           salad dressings




croutons           sauces
dinkle (spelt)                     seitan




durham                             self-basting poultry




einkorn                            semolina




emmer (durham wheat)               some medications (prescription or over the counter)




farina                             soup bases and bouillon




farro (called emmer wheat except   soy or rice drinks (may have barley malt or malt
in Italy)                          enzymes used during manufacturing)




food starch                        soy sauce (except for a wheat-free version)




french fries                       spelt




                                   spice mixtures (often contain wheat as an anticaking
fu (a dried form of gluten)
                                   agent, filler, or thickening agent)
gliadin                              starch



glue used on some envelopes,
                                     stuffings
stamps, and labels




gluten                               syrups




gluten peptides                      thickeners




glutenin                             triticale




graham                               wheat




gravies                              wheat bran




hydrolyzed wheat gluten              wheat germ




hydrolyzed wheat protein             wheat grass




ice cream (may contain flour as an   wheat starch
     anticrystallizing agent)



Common Sources of Gluten/Wheat Contamination:

     millet, white rice flour, buckwheat flour,          powder coating inside rubber gloves (may
     sorghum flour, and soy flour                        be derived from wheat)




                                                         art supplies, including paints, clay, glue, and
     foods sold in bulk (often contaminated by
                                                         play dough; gluten can be transferred to the
     scoops used in other bins and by flour dust)
                                                         mouth if hands aren’t washed




     toasters, grills, pans, cutting boards, utensils,   personal-care products (like shampoo) and
     appliances, and oils that were used for             household products may be transferred to the
     preparing foods containing gluten                   lips and ingested




                                                         personal products, especially shampoos
     flour dust
                                                         (may be transferred to the lips and ingested)




     knives double-dipped into food spreads after
     spreading on bread (can leave gluten-               some waxes or resins on fruit and vegetables
     containing crumbs)




      So if most of what is known about prolamins comes from the study of gluten and celiac disease,
how do we know this applies to all prolamins? There is much similarity in structure and function (due
to homology, or similarity in amino acid sequences) between the prolamins of different grains and
legumes. While there have been no comprehensive studies evaluating the detrimental health effects of
all food sources of prolamins, there is enough convincing evidence of similar proteins in nongluten-
containing grains and pseudo-grains to support their complete removal from our diets. For example,
studies show that prolamins in quinoa, corn, and oats can cause damage to the gut and stimulate the
immune system in celiac sufferers in a manner completely analogous to gliadin. Clearly, this means
that those with celiac disease should never consume these other grains or pseudo-grains. But also,
because of the understanding that gluten is probably a culprit in all autoimmune disease (as discussed
in chapter 1), anyone with a diagnosed autoimmune disease (or indeed even an increased risk of
autoimmune disease) should absolutely avoid the consumption of grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes.




   How to Avoid Corn
Ingredients derived from corn can be found in the vast majority of packaged and manufactured foods.
If you are very sensitive to corn-derived products, avoiding these pervasive ingredients can be
overwhelming. However, avoiding processed foods in general will make a huge difference. You may
or may not need to go to the extent of avoiding all traces of corn-derived ingredients (in medications,
for example); however, being aware of where corn exposure may be sneaking into your life will help
you identify whether or not it is a problem. The following list includes some hidden—and not-so-
hidden—sources of corn.


Ingredients Derived from Corn

     acetic acid                                        invert syrup or sugar




     alcohol                                            iodized salt




     alpha tocopherol                                   lactate




     artificial flavorings                              lactic acid




     artificial sweeteners                              lauryl glucoside
ascorbates        lecithin




ascorbic acid     linoleic acid




aspartame         lysine




astaxanthin       magnesium fumarate




baking powder     maize




barley malt       malic acid




bleached flour    malonic acid




blended sugar     malt, malt extract




brown sugar       malt syrup from corn




calcium citrate   maltitol
calcium fumarate                  maltodextrin




calcium gluconate                 maltol




calcium lactate                   maltose




calcium magnesium acetate (CMA)   mannitol




calcium stearate                  margarine




calcium stearoyl lactylate        methyl gluceth




caramel and caramel color         methyl glucose




carboxymethylcellulose sodium     methyl glucoside




cellulose, microcrystalline       methylcellulose
cellulose, powdered           microcrystalline cellulose



cetearyl glucoside            modified cellulose gum




choline chloride              modified cornstarch




citric acid                   modified food starch




                              molasses (corn syrup may be present; check
citrus cloud emulsion (CCS)
                              label)




cocoglycerides                mono- and diglycerides




confectioners’ sugar          monosodium glutamate (MSG)




corn oil                      natural flavorings




corn sweetener                Olestra/olean




corn sugar                    polenta
corn syrup                  polydextrose



corn syrup solids           polylactic acid (PLA)




cornmeal                    polysorbates (e.g., Polysorbate 80)




cornstarch                  polyvinyl acetate




crosscarmellose sodium      potassium citrate




crystalline dextrose        potassium fumarate




crystalline fructose        potassium gluconate




cyclodextrin                powdered sugar




datum (dough conditioner)   pregelatinized starch




decyl glucoside             propionic acid
decyl polyglucose                           propylene glycol




dextrin                                     propylene glycol monostearate




dextrose (also found in IV solutions)       saccharin




dextrose anything (such as monohydrate or
                                            salt (iodized)
anhydrous)




d-Gluconic acid                             semolina (unless from wheat)




distilled white vinegar                     simethicone




drying agent                                sodium carboxymethylcellulose




erythorbic acid                             sodium citrate




erythritol                                  sodium erythorbate
ethanol          sodium fumarate




Ethocel 20       sodium lactate




ethylcellulose   sodium starch glycolate




ethyl acetate    sodium stearoyl fumarate




ethyl alcohol    sorbate




ethyl lactate    sorbic acid




ethyl maltol     sorbitan




ethylene         sorbitan monooleate




Fibersol-2       sorbitan trioleate




flavorings       sorbitol
food starch               sorghum (syrup and/or grain may be mixed
                          with corn)



fructose                  Splenda (artificial sweetener)




fruit juice concentrate   starch




fumaric acid              stearic acid




germ/germ meal            stearoyls




gluconate                 Sucralose (artificial sweetener)




gluconic acid             sucrose




glucono delta-lactone     sugar




gluconolactone            talc
glucosamine                                  threonine



glucose                                      tocopherol (vitamin E)




glucose syrup (also found in IV solutions)   treacle




glutamate                                    triethyl citrate




gluten                                       unmodified starch




gluten feed/meal                             vanilla, natural flavoring




glycerides                                   vanilla, pure or extract




glycerin                                     vanillin




glycerol                                     vinegar, distilled white




golden syrup                                 vinyl acetate
grits                                          vitamin C




hominy                                         vitamin E




honey                                          vitamin supplements




hydrolyzed corn                                xanthan gum




hydrolyzed corn protein                        xylitol




hydrolyzed vegetable protein                   yeast




hydroxypropyl methylcellulose                  zea mays




hydroxypropyl     methylcellulose   pthalate
                                               zein
(HPMCP)




inositol
Agglutinins


Another class of problematic lectins in grains and legumes are agglutinins. Agglutinins are proteins
characterized by their ability to induce the clumping (or agglutination) of red blood cells. Some
agglutinins, such as ricin, which comes from castor bean casings, are so toxic that as little as one
milligram, if inhaled or injected (presumably accidentally) intravenously or intramuscularly, is
deadly. How much is one milligram of ricin? Roughly the size of a grain of sand. In fact, the
Bulgarian dissident Georgi Markov was assassinated in London in 1978 with a pellet containing 0.2
milligrams of ricin that was shot or injected into his thigh, allegedly with the tip of an umbrella.
      Agglutinins are part of the seed’s natural defense mechanisms. While all the roles these lectins
play in protecting the seed have yet to be discovered, what we do know is that they protect the seed
from fungal infection and perhaps from insect predation as well. In fact, genetically modified grains
typically contain higher levels of agglutinins to help protect industrial crops from pests. Wheat germ
agglutinin (WGA) is so powerful at resisting insects that the gene for WGA has even been added to
genetically modified corn.
      As is the case with prolamines, agglutinins are difficult to digest because we lack proteolytic
enzymes (digestive enzymes that lyse, or break apart, proteins) capable of breaking it apart into
individual amino acids. (It is also very stable at high temperatures and low pH, so neither cooking
nor our stomach acid are much help in breaking it down.)
      WGA is the best-studied agglutinin, and probably the most detrimental (although soybean
agglutinin is a close second; we’ll get to that in a minute). WGA is not directly toxic to gut
enterocytes in concentrations equivalent to those normally found in food, but because our bodies can’t
digest it, WGA travels through the small intestine largely intact. WGA is very good at interacting with
the brush border of the intestine, and in doing so increases intestinal permeability. (Hello, leaky gut.)
It is also a well-known stimulator of the immune system. In fact, its activities in the gut qualify it as a
biologically active protein, which is not normal (or healthful!) for proteins in our food.
      The outer membrane of every cell is composed of a double layer of fat molecules (called the
lipid bylayer) with various proteins (receptors, for one) embedded within the layer that perform a
variety of functions (see here). Some of the fats and proteins within the membrane have sugar
molecules (which are important for a variety of normal membrane functions) attached to the outside of
the membrane. These are called membrane carbohydrates, and they actually constitute 2–10 percent of
a cell’s membrane. These membrane carbohydrates are one of eight different sugars: glucose,
galactose, mannose, fucose, xylose, N-acetylgalactosamine, N-acetylglucosamine, and N-
acetylneuraminic acid.
      WGA binds specifically to two sugars (N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylneuraminic acid) that
happen to be membrane carbohydrates in all animal cells and form key parts of the glycocalyx of
gastrointestinal cells (see here). WGA binds at a very high rate to human intestinal cells via these
membrane carbohydrates, and WGA is rapidly internalized into the enterocytes, probably via
endocytosis (see here).
      One of the membrane glycoproteins that WGA binds to (by binding to the carbohydrate
component of the glycoprotein) is the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor. The EGF receptor is
well known to promote what is called receptor-mediated endocytosis and may be the reason WGA is
so readily internalized by gut enterocytes. Even more important, though, the EGF receptor regulates
the paracellular permeability of epithelial cells—this means that when the EGF receptor is activated
(for example, by binding with WGA), signals are sent throughout the cell that result in the opening of
the tight junctions between enterocytes. It is thought that the EGF receptor plays an important
physiological role in maintaining epithelial-tissue organization and permeability, thereby maintaining
the integrity of the gut barrier.
      Very low concentrations of WGA (but very possible to achieve from dietary sources) increase
epithelial-cell permeability, meaning that WGA causes the tight junctions between epithelial cells to
open up sufficiently for molecules to cross (at least scientists have measured this in isolated cells
studied in the lab). WGA accumulates in lysosomes (whether this damages the lysosomes, as in the
case of gliadin, has not been studied), and some of the WGA crosses the epithelial barrier intact
(though we don’t know exactly how yet). And while the amount of WGA that crosses the epithelial
barrier is small, it’s certainly enough to have a huge impact on the immune system. In fact, even at
these very low concentrations, WGA stimulates the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines.




     WGA is known to have a profound effect on both the innate and the adaptive immune systems.
Some of the proinflammatory cytokines induced by WGA cause inflammation, including stimulating
phagocytosis by neutrophils (“eating” of stuff by white blood cells; see here) and stimulating the
production of reactive oxygen species (oxidants; see here). And once again, this generalized
inflammation can damage the innocent-bystander enterocytes. WGA also induces cytokine production
known to increase proliferation (cell division) of all helper T cells. However, WGA can also bind to
cytokine receptors on T cells and thereby inhibit proliferation (which may actually contribute to
overstimulation of one subset of T cells, as is often seen in autoimmune and immune-related
disorders). WGA also stimulates the production of antibodies by B cells. And WGA binds to blood-
derived immune cells, increasing activation of inflammatory cells and increasing apoptosis of white
blood cells.
      WGA is so good at getting into gut enterocytes that it is being investigated as a carrier for oral
drugs, the idea being that WGA could be bound to a drug molecule and help facilitate the drug’s
absorption into the body. Fortunately, a red flag has been raised about the possible toxic effects of
WGA as a drug-delivery vehicle, with research suggesting that WGA may be the cause of various
gastrointestinal disorders.
      So what about other agglutinins? While most have not been as extensively studied as WGA,
agglutinins from other plants have been shown to have similar effects. Kidney beans contain a high
level of a very toxic and immunogenic agglutinin called phytohaemagglutinin (sometimes called
kidney bean lectin). Phytohaemagglutinin is also found to a lesser extent in cannellini beans, common
beans, and broad beans, such as fava beans. As few as five raw kidney beans can cause extreme
gastrointestinal distress, with symptoms like those of food poisoning (not that anyone would want to
eat raw kidney beans). While soaking and then cooking beans greatly reduces the activity of
phytohaemagglutinin, it does not get rid of it, especially when cooked at lower temperatures, such as
in a slow cooker. Phytohaemagglutinin can cross the gut barrier, increase intestinal permeability, and
stimulate the immune system. In fact, phytohaemagglutinin is easily detected in the bloodstream after
consumption. It has also been shown to cause extensive overgrowth of Escherichia coli, or E. coli, in
the small intestine (some E. coli is normal, but it is a common culprit in small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth).
      Other agglutinins, like peanut agglutinin (PNA, or peanut lectin), also enter the bloodstream
quickly after being consumed, implying significant effects on intestinal permeability. Agglutinins from
nettle (typically consumed only cooked) increase intestinal permeability. Soybean agglutinin (soybean
lectin) and concanavalin (an agglutinin in jack beans, which are often used in animal feeds) have been
shown to increase epithelial permeability much as wheat germ agglutinin does. Concanavalin
stimulates cytotoxic T cells and inflammatory cells from the innate immune system and is being
investigated as a drug for chemotherapy (because chemotherapy drugs are more toxic to cancer cells
than they are to normal cells, which seems to be the case with concanavalin). Soybean agglutinin is
known to bind to and activate dendritic cells and stimulate proliferation of T cells. In fact, soybean
agglutinin so efficiently targets and stimulates the immune system that it is being studied for use in
vaccines to improve immunization.




Lectins in Nightshades
While this section has focused on the prolamins and agglutinins found in grains, pseudo-grains, and
legumes, these troublemakers are also found in vegetables from the nightshade family (see here). The
best-understood nightshade lectin is tomato lectin, which is an agglutinin, more technically called
lycopersicon esculentum agglutinin (LEA). Analogous to WGA, LEA binds to the surface of
enterocytes and is known to cross the gut barrier. LEA has been investigated as an adjuvant (immune-
stimulating chemical) for use in intranasal vaccines because it activates antibody production. An
agglutinin from datura (a genus of plants belonging to the nightshade family, several of which are used
as herbal medicines) also increases intestinal permeability.
     Agglutinins cause a leaky gut and, through direct binding with immune cells, stimulate both the
innate and the adaptive immune systems. While some agglutinins (like phytohaemagglutinin) are
largely deactivated by cooking, others (like wheat germ agglutinin) are not. When you combine the
toxic and immunostimulatory effects of agglutinins with the toxic and immunostimulatory effects of
prolamins, it becomes very clear that, for those with autoimmune disease, foods that contain these
substances should not be consumed. In fact, given what is now known about the actions of WGA and
gliadin, it is surprising that, as a society, we even consider wheat to be a food. And if the lectin
content of grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes is not damning enough, there are still other ways these
foods are detrimental to our health.




   How to Avoid Soy
Soy is another ingredient that has permeated the food supply. Soy lecithin and soy protein are
especially common ingredients in packaged goods. The following list includes foods that are
derived from soy:


     bean curd                                             soy lecithin




     bean sprouts                                          soy meal




     chocolate (soy lecithin may be used in
     manufacturing)
soy milk




edamame (fresh soybeans)         soy nuts




                                 soy protein (concentrate, hydrolyzed,
hydrolyzed soy protein (HSP)
                                 isolate)




kinako                           soy sprouts




miso (fermented soybean paste)   soy yogurt




mono- and diglycerides           soy pasta




monosodium glutamate (MSG)       soy sauce




natto                            soya




nimame                           soybean (curds, granules)
    okara                                              soybean oil



    shoyu                                              tamari




    soy albumin                                        tempeh




    soy cheese                                         teriyaki sauce




    soy fiber                                          textured vegetable protein (TVP)




    soy flour                                          tofu (dofu, kori-dofu)




    soy grits                                          yuba




    soy ice cream


Potentially Cross-Contaminated Foods Must Be Labeled:


    “may contain soy”
    “produced on shared equipment with soy”
    “produced in a facility that also processes soy”


Products That Commonly Contain Soy:
Asian cuisine (Chinese, Japanese,   margarine
Korean, Thai)




baked goods                         mayonnaise




                                    meat products with fillers (for example, burgers or
baking mixes
                                    sausages)




bouillon cubes                      nutrition supplements (vitamins)




candy                               peanut butter and peanut butter substitutes




cereal                              protein powders




chicken broth                       sauces and gravies




chicken (raw or cooked) processed
                                    smoothies
with chicken broth




deli meats                          soups
     energy bars/nutrition bars              vegetable broth


     imitation dairy foods, such as soy      vegetarian meat substitutes (veggie burgers, imitation
     milk, vegan cheese, and vegan ice       chicken patties, imitation lunch meats, imitation bacon
     cream                                   bits)




     infant formula                          waxes or horticultural oils on fruits




Digestive Enzyme Inhibitors




Seeds do not want to be digested. A digested seed can’t grow into a new plant. So it makes sense that
seeds contain substances designed to protect them during passage through the gastrointestinal tract.
These include digestive-enzyme inhibitors, which are found in particularly high concentrations in
grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes. Digestive-enzyme inhibitors can survive cooking and resist
digestion. When consumed, they can cause increased intestinal permeability and gut dysbiosis and can
even activate the innate immune system.
     When a whole seed is consumed, digestive-enzyme inhibitors inhibit the body’s digestive
enzymes—hence their name—in particular by preventing the enzymes that break apart proteins and
starches or sugars from doing their jobs. In the case of small seeds in fruits, such as berries or
bananas, the digestive-enzyme inhibitors focus on the outer layer of the seed to help deliver that seed
intact to the other end of the digestive system. (Before the advent of the toilet, this would mean that
the seed was then planted in very fertile soil.) But when seeds are ground or are large enough to
require chewing before entering the gastrointestinal tract, digestive-enzyme inhibitors are released
into the gut, where they can wreak havoc. So part of the issue with digestive-enzyme inhibitors is how
concentrated they are in different types of seeds, but it’s also about whether or not the processing of
those seeds (like grinding wheat into flour, crushing soybeans to make tofu, or chewing kidney beans
before swallowing them) releases their digestive-enzyme inhibitors into the gut.
      Digestive-enzyme inhibitors are considered to be antinutrients—substances that interfere with
the absorption of nutrients in food. However, their effects are far more pervasive than simply
decreasing the availability of micronutrients for your body. Consuming foods laden with digestive-
enzyme inhibitors stimulates secretion of more digestive enzymes from the pancreas. Synthesizing
digestive enzymes requires amino acids (typically sulfur-rich amino acids), so the hyperproduction of
digestive enzymes by the pancreas, beyond causing undue stress on the organ itself, causes a loss of
nutrition from the body. Yes, digestive-enzyme inhibitors can deplete your body of some nutrients.
This idea is supported by animal studies in which pancreatic hypertrophy and hyperplasia (in which
the cells of the pancreas pathologically increase in cell size and number, respectively, which is
associated with disease) occur as a direct result of consuming soybean-derived inhibitors of the
digestive enzyme trypsin.
      As mentioned, there are two main types of digestive-enzyme inhibitors present in grains, pseudo-
grains, and legumes that are known to be bad news for digestion and the gut barrier: protease
inhibitors, which block the digestive enzymes responsible for breaking apart proteins into individual
amino acids from doing their job; and amylase inhibitors, which block the digestive enzymes
responsible for breaking apart starches into individual monosaccharides (simple sugars) from doing
their job. There are many types of proteases and amylases, and the effects of inhibiting certain
digestive enzymes is still being intensely studied (although, oddly enough, far more aggressively in
regard to the health of farmed fish and poultry compared with humans).




The Problem with GMOs




One of the reasons autoimmune disease may be on the rise is that there are more prolamins,
agglutinins, digestive-enzyme inhibitors, and saponins in genetically modified crops than in heritage
crops. This is because GMO seeds are engineered to contain more of these compounds to protect the
seed, which makes the crops more resistant to pests and infections. Unfortunately, what makes GMOs
more viable as crops is also what makes them much more problematic for our health.



      One effect of inhibiting a subset of digestive enzymes is that, because the pancreas cannot
selectively secrete only certain digestive enzymes, when it releases supplemental digestive enzymes
into the small intestine, there can be overactivity of other digestive enzymes. The resulting imbalance
can damage the gut barrier. For example, some proteases (such as trypsin, chymotrypsin, and
elastase), when found in excessive quantities in the digestive tract, increase intestinal permeability by
unraveling the proteins that form the tight junctions between gut enterocytes, thus opening them up (see
here). So when your pancreas secretes extra digestive enzymes to compensate for the inhibition of
certain digestive enzymes from inhibitors in grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes, a leaky gut is a
direct consequence. To make matters worse, this increase in intestinal permeability occurs
concurrently with the presence of large amounts of incompletely digested prolamins and agglutinins,
which may then cross the gut barrier and interact with the gut-associated lymphoid tissue.
      Another important factor when it comes to the consumption of digestive-enzyme inhibitors is the
overall interference with digestion. As previously discussed, whatever we cannot properly digest
becomes food for gut microorganisms (see here). In the presence of an overabundance of food, those
microorganisms (or, worse yet, a subset of them) can become quite numerous, leading to bacterial
overgrowth and gut dysbiosis. Recall that gut dysbiosis on its own can cause a leaky gut and interfere
with the normal functioning of the immune system. In fact, studies in which rats were fed amylase
inhibitors derived from kidney beans (in doses suggested for the treatment of diabetes) resulted in
such severe bacterial overgrowth that the rats’ cecums (the first part of the large intestine) ruptured
(the rats then had to be euthanized). Other effects of amylase inhibitors include reduction in growth
(owing to loss of nitrogen, lipids, and carbohydrates), hypertrophy of the intestines and pancreas, and
atrophy of the liver and thymus glands (see here).




A Few More Notes on Dairy
There is a big difference in nutritional value between conventional, grain-fed, pasteurized dairy
products and grass-fed raw (especially full-fat and cultured or fermented) dairy products. Grass-fed
dairy, especially the fat from grass-fed dairy, is an excellent source of fat-soluble vitamins and
conjugated linoleic acid, an anti-inflammatory and healing fat (see here). Fermented dairy is an
excellent source of probiotics (see here). There are also some valuable proteins in dairy, such as
glutathione (very important for reducing inflammation and protecting against oxidative stress) and
whey (which may help prevent cancer). However, even high-quality dairy products are not as
nutrient-dense as quality meats, seafood, vegetables, and fruits. And even high-quality dairy products
pose potentially serious problems for those with autoimmune disease. All dairy products are
restricted on the Paleo Approach (at least initially; see here) for the following reasons:
     Milk contains protease inhibitors that may contribute to the development of a leaky gut.
     Milk is highly insulinogenic, which may contribute to inflammation and insulin resistance (see
     here).
     Dairy proteins are very difficult to digest and preferentially feed E. coli, which could contribute
     to the development of gut dysbiosis.
     Milk contains active bovine (cow) hormones that have the potential to alter human hormone
     levels. While the effects of consuming these hormones in food have not been studied, insulin-like
     growth factor-1 (IGF-1) has been linked to higher risk of breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer,
     with the strong indication that consuming dairy protein is a large contributor to blood IGF-1
     levels.
     Milk increases mucus production, which may aggravate conditions such as asthma but also
     creates excess mucus in the gastrointestinal tract, causing irritation in the gut lining and hindering
     nutrient and mineral absorption.
     Lactose is poorly tolerated by adults. Approximately 25 percent of Caucasians (American and
     European) are lactose-intolerant. Ninety-seven percent of Native Americans are lactose-
     intolerant. Raw milk contains enzymes to help digest lactose.
     Dairy is highly allergenic. Epidemiologic reports of cow’s milk allergy (IgE-antibody reactions
     to cow’s milk proteins) range between 1 percent and 17.5 percent in preschoolers, 1 percent and
     13.5 percent in children ages five to sixteen, and 1 percent and 4 percent in adults. It is not
     known how prevalent sensitivities (IgA-, IgG-, IgD-, and IgM-antibody reactions) are to cow’s
     milk. Very importantly, even the trace dairy proteins in ghee can be a problem.
     Cow’s milk proteins are also known to be gluten cross-reactors, which means that people with
     gluten intolerance may produce antibodies against gluten that also recognize dairy proteins. For
     these people, eating dairy is the same as eating gluten (see here).




     Perhaps most alarming, however, is evidence that protease inhibitors can cause inflammation
directly. A recent paper showed that inhibitors of trypsin and alpha-amylase (a type of amylase) that
were derived from wheat strongly activated the innate immune system—in particular, monocytes
(white blood cells), macrophages, and dendritic cells (see here) by means of activating Toll-like
receptors (specialized sensors on the cell membrane of sentinel-type cells)—and significantly
increased production of proinflammatory cytokines, both in the small intestine and in the blood. These
digestive-enzyme inhibitors also stimulated proinflammatory cytokine production in biopsy samples
from celiac patients. The authors suggest that, while these findings are certainly relevant to celiac
disease, the activation of a Toll-like receptor implies that the proinflammatory effects of these
substances are widespread. This means that the digestive-enzyme inhibitors in grains, pseudo-grains,
and legumes may play a critical role in both intestinal and nonintestinal inflammatory diseases, not
just autoimmune disease.
      So which foods contain digestive-enzyme inhibitors? Grains, pseudo-grains, legumes, nuts, and
seeds contain both protease and amylase inhibitors. Grains are very high in protease inhibitors,
although soybeans are the most concentrated source of trypsin inhibitors among commonly consumed
foods. All legumes are also very high in amylase inhibitors (which is why they are called resistant
starches—they are literally resistant to digestion). It is very important to note here that dairy products
are also high in protease inhibitors.

Phytates and Phytic Acid

The antinutrient properties of phytates and phytic acid were already discussed in the context of
mineral absorption (see here). However, phytates also limit the activity of a variety of digestive
enzymes, including the proteases trypsin and pepsin, as well as amylase and glucosidase. This means
that phytates can be as devastating to the gut barrier and the gut microflora as digestive-enzyme
inhibitors, namely by increasing gut permeability (by stimulating the pancreas to release excess
digestive enzymes) and feeding bacterial overgrowth (by inhibiting digestion).
     It’s important to emphasize that excessive dietary phytate and phytic acid are the problem.
Phytates are also present in much lower concentrations in nonreproductive plant parts (like leaves
and stems). Consuming phytates in more moderate quantities may provide an important antioxidant
function and help reduce cardiovascular risk factors and cancer risk. Also, moderate consumption
means that a healthy amount and variety of gut bacteria will be able to liberate some minerals from
the phytate and make them more absorbable. However, don’t forget that gut dysbiosis is extremely
common in autoimmune disease, which is why it is crucial to omit high-phytate foods from the diet.
If Seeds Are Such a Problem, Why Are Fruits and Vegetables with
Seeds OK to Eat?




Fruit is not restricted on the Paleo Approach (although you do need to limit quantity in order to
moderate fructose intake, which is discussed on see here). You may be wondering why the seeds from
fruits like berries, bananas, kiwi, cucumber, and zucchini (yes, cucumber and zucchini are technically
fruits), whose seeds are consumed, are OK but all other seeds considered problematic.
      These types of fruit come from plants with a friendlier defense strategy: we get to eat the
delicious fruit encasing the seeds, and then the seeds, which pass through our digestive tracts intact,
get to be planted in rich manure. How do you know the difference between a harmless seed and one
that contains damaging lectins? Here’s the rule: If you can eat it raw, then it’s fine to eat. If you have
to cook it, it has damaging lectins.
      But there’s a caveat: If the seeds are big enough for you to break up with your teeth (like those of
pomegranates, cucumber, and zucchini), you should exercise caution with these foods. These seeds
still contain protease inhibitors, and breaking up the seeds with your teeth may irritate the gut. You
can get around this by removing the seeds (scraping out the middle of a cucumber or spitting out
pomegranate seeds, for example) or by avoiding these foods altogether when you first adopt the Paleo
Approach.



     Phytates and phytic acid are found in all seeds: not just grains, pseudo-grains, and legumes, but
also tree nuts and edible flower and vegetable seeds (like sunflower seeds and pumpkin seeds),
which might normally be considered a healthy part of a Paleo diet.




Saponins and Glycoalkaloids

You may already be sold on the fact that grains, pseudo-grains, legumes, and nightshades should be
dropped from your diet. But there is another class of chemicals that have the ability to increase
intestinal permeability and act as potent adjuvants (in particular stimulating antibody production):
saponins.
      All plants contain saponins, often concentrated in the seeds. These compounds have
detergentlike properties and are designed to protect the plants from consumption by microbes and
insects by dissolving the cell membranes of these potential predators. Saponins consist of a fat-
soluble core (having either a steroid or triterpenoid structure) with one or more side chains of water-
soluble carbohydrates. (This combination of a water-soluble and a fat-soluble component is what
makes saponins act like a detergent—something that can make oil and water mix.) Legumes, pseudo-
grains, and vegetables from the nightshade family are high in saponins.
      The detergentlike structure of saponins gives them the ability to interact with the cholesterol
molecules embedded in the surface membrane of every cell in the body and rearrange those
cholesterol molecules to form a stable, porelike complex. Basically, dietary saponins create holes in
the surface membrane of the enterocytes, allowing a variety of substances in the gut to enter the cell.
Beyond the toxic effects some of the substances that may leak into the cell may exert, cells in general
do not survive large, irreversible changes in membrane permeability. There are many different types
of saponins, and some bind more easily and more tightly to the cholesterol molecules in the cell
membrane than others. As such, different saponins can create larger or smaller pores, which may be
more or less stable. The larger, more stable, or more numerous the pores, the more difficult it is for
the enterocyte to recover. However, smaller and less-stable saponin pores, which tend to be transient
and close up without harming the cell, may also play a very important normal role in digestion by
facilitating the absorption of some minerals without harming the enterocytes. Some saponins have
even been found to prevent cancer. So, while some saponins can be very damaging to the gut barrier,
dietary saponins perform a spectrum of functions, some of which are beneficial.




     The best-understood toxic dietary saponins are a subset called glycoalkaloids, which are found
in nightshade vegetables. The flowers, fruit, and foliage of the nightshade family contain
glycoalkaloids (for example, the alpha-solanine and alpha-chaconine in potato, the alpha-solanine in
eggplant, and the alpha-tomatine in tomato). Toxicity studies in animals have shown very dramatic
effects of various glycoalkaloids, typically including weight loss from malabsorption of nutrients,
lower fetal survival rate, and higher incidence of birth defects. Fortunately, humans do not seem to be
as susceptible to these toxic effects (or we probably wouldn’t eat tomatoes at all), but we also tend
not to consume such high levels. But in humans, glycoalkaloid poisoning can and does occur with
excessive consumption of nightshade vegetables, and many researchers have hypothesized that the
low-level toxic exposure from more moderate consumption of nightshades can contribute to a variety
of health conditions (including autoimmune disease).




Saponins, Enterohepatic Circulation, and Fat-Soluble Vitamins
Bile salts (also called conjugated bile acids), which are produced by the liver, stored in the
gallbladder, and then secreted into the small intestine after eating, are necessary to digest fats. They
are created from cholesterol, which is converted into one of two types of fatty acid (cholic acid and
chenodeoxycholic acid) and then conjugated (joined together) with the amino acids glycine or taurine
to create a detergentlike structure (very similar to saponins). The majority (up to 90 percent) of bile
salts are reabsorbed by the small intestine and recycled back to the liver for reuse (a process called
enterohepatic circulation). Bile salts act as an emulsifier (or detergent) by breaking apart large fat
globules so that lipases (digestive enzymes that break down fats into individual fatty acids) can more
effectively do their job. Bile acids also facilitate the absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins by
creating structures called micelles—aggregates of fatty acids, lipids, cholesterol, and fat-soluble
vitamins—which are water soluble and easily absorbed by the enterocytes.




After fatty acids, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed, the enterocytes repackage
these components into structures called chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are delivered to the other
side of the cell and then circulate through the body via the lymphatic system.

      Because saponins interact strongly with cholesterol, they have been studied as potential
cholesterol-lowering drugs. Because of their strong cholesterol-binding properties, saponins stop the
incorporation of cholesterol into micelles and therefore stop the absorption or reabsorption of
cholesterol. This has the effect of lowering total blood cholesterol. This sounds like a good thing,
right? However, don’t forget that not only is blood cholesterol not the cause of cardiovascular
disease but also that cholesterol serves important physiological functions in the body. Although high
blood cholesterol is not desirable, stopping the absorption of cholesterol in the intestines is an
artificial way to lower it and does not address the root problems. And micelle formation is necessary
for absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. While there is evidence that dietary saponins also bind to fat-
soluble vitamins directly, they ultimately affect absorption by inhibiting micelle formation. Given that
patients with autoimmune disease have deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins, this is clearly a problem.
          “This discussion suggests that potato GAs [glycoalkaloids], particularly solanine and
          chaconine, are extremely toxic to humans and animals, and that this problem should no
          longer be ignored as it could turn into a serious health threat.”
          YAROSLAV I. KORPAN, PHD,
          “Potato Glycoalkaloids: True Safety or False Sense of Security?”
          Trends in Biotechnology 22 (March 2004): 147-51.

     Some very important studies have investigated the effects of glycoalkaloids at relatively low
concentrations on human intestinal epithelial cells. The glycoalkaloids alpha-chaconine, alpha-
solanine, and alpha-tomatine have all been shown to decrease viability of human intestinal cells (yes,
that means killing them) and to increase epithelial permeability (yes, that means they can cause a
leaky gut). This increase in permeability is attributable not only to the effects on cell health but also to
an effect on cell-to-cell contact. (There doesn’t seem to be an effect on tight junctions, but rather on a
different type of junction called a GAP junction.) Oh, and alpha-tomatine is very good at crossing the
gut barrier.
     Whether through a direct influence on intestinal permeability or because of the presence of an
already leaky gut, saponins are able to enter the bloodstream. When this happens in sufficient
concentrations, saponins cause hemolysis (destruction of the cell membrane of red blood cells).
Saponins also act as adjuvants; in fact, alpha-tomatine is being investigated for use in vaccines (see
here). While some concerns about its use remain, these studies have shown that alpha-tomatine is a
potent stimulator of cytotoxic T cells, which is relevant to the discussion of autoimmune disease.
     Beyond these actions of saponins, glycoalkaloids inhibit a key enzyme, acetylcholinesterase,
which is required to conduct nerve impulses. There is also evidence that diets high in potatoes, in
particular, result in increased inflammation (although this could also be because of the carbohydrate
load from potatoes and not an effect of the glycoalkaloids themselves; see here).




Nightshades and Steroids
The flowers, fruit, and foliage of the nightshade family contain steroidal drugs (for example, the
stimulating capsaicin in peppers, the tranquilizing nicotine in tobacco). Of particular concern is
capsaicin, which is found in chili peppers and is one of the substances in them that gives them heat.
While a variety of health benefits have been attributed to capsaicin, it is also a potent irritant to a
variety of tissues, including skin, eyes, and mucous membranes (including the gut). Very importantly,
there is evidence that capsaicin can increase intestinal permeability.




     When forming, saponin pores (even pores that are small and transient and do not explicitly harm
the enterocytes) have the intriguing property of depriving the enterocyte of its ability to actively
transport some nutrients, especially carbohydrates. While slowing down sugar transport from the gut
to the bloodstream seems like a great thing (the reason beans are so often recommended as a
carbohydrate source for diabetics), it also creates more food to feed bacterial overgrowth in the gut,
thereby contributing to gut dysbiosis. In fact, saponins may contribute to gut dysbiosis in another way:
They may hinder the growth of some probiotic bacterial strains while stimulating the overgrowth of
some Gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli. In fact, even in the presence of antibiotics,
saponins have been shown to enhance the growth of six different strains of E. coli. An overabundance
of E. coli is a common feature of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.




What Are Nightshades?
There are more than two thousand plant species in the nightshade family, the vast majority of which
are inedible and many of which are highly poisonous (like deadly nightshade and jimsonweed).
Tobacco is a nightshade and is known to cause heart, lung, brain, and circulatory problems, as well
as cancer and other health problems (although some of this clearly has to do with the other toxins in
tobacco products derived from processing). The following are all members of the nightshade
family (a couple of which you might only encounter while on vacation in the tropics or in
supplements):


     ashwagandha (see here)
     bell peppers (aka sweet peppers)
     bush tomatoes
     cape gooseberries (aka ground cherries—not to be confused with regular cherries)
     cocona
     eggplant
     garden huckleberries (not to be confused with regular huckleberries)
     goji berries
     hot peppers (chili peppers, chili-based spices, red pepper, cayenne)
     kutjera
     naranjillas
     paprika
     pepinos
     pimentos
     potatoes (but not sweet potatoes)
     tamarillos
     tomatillos
     tomatoes


     Overconsumption of these edible species can be poisonous to anyone, and it is possible that the
low-level toxic properties of nightshade vegetables contribute to a variety of health issues over time.
     Some websites have erroneously “reported” that some nonnightshade fruits and vegetables
contain the glycoalkaloid solanine. These fruits and vegetables—including blueberries,
huckleberries, okra, apples, cherries, sugar beets, and artichokes—are safe to consume from a
glycoalkaloid standpoint.
Alcohol

It should be no surprise that alcohol is a toxin. That’s why it intoxicates (toxic is the root of
intoxicate, after all) and why life-threatening conditions such as cirrhosis of the liver are associated
with long-term chronic consumption. However, moderate consumption of alcohol (not just red wine)
seems to provide diverse health benefits: it reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease, reduces the
risk of type 2 diabetes, prevents Alzheimer’s disease (a suspected autoimmune disease), and may
even reduce the risk of some cancers (although moderate alcohol consumption also increases the risk
of other cancers). However, as far as autoimmune disease is concerned, alcoholic beverages are most
likely doing more harm than good.
      Alcohol causes an increase in intestinal permeability: it unravels the tight junctions between
enterocytes, thus opening them up, as well as another type of junction between enterocytes called
adherens junctions. As you know by now, opening up the junctions between enterocytes creates holes
in the gut barrier through which the contents of the gut can leak into the body. By opening up both the
tight junctions and the adherens junctions, alcohol is able to create holes big enough to allow some
very large molecules to slip into the body, most notably endotoxins. Endotoxins are toxic components
of the cell walls of Gram-negative bacteria, which live in our guts.




     Normal bacterial residents of a healthy gut include both Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria. What do Gram-negative and Gram-positive mean? Gram refers to a staining technique that
differentiates between these two major classes of bacteria: Gram-negative bacteria don’t hold the
purple dye used; Gram-positive bacteria do. Gram-negative bacteria have more complex cell
membranes and tend to be pathogenic (that is, they cause disease), but a notable fraction of our
normal gut microflora are probiotic Gram-negative bacteria. In a study comparing the microflora of
children from a rural African village (who ate a hunter-gatherer–type diet) with Italian children, the
African children had slightly more Gram-negative than Gram-positive bacteria, and the Gram-
negative bacteria were mainly from the phylum Bacteroidetes. (An example of a Bacteroidetes is
bacteroides, a probiotic genus found in the supplement Prescript-Assist; see here). The Italian
children had more Gram-positive than Gram-negative bacteria, mainly from the phylum Firmicutes.
(Lactobacillus, a common probiotic found in supplements and lacto-fermented vegetables, is a
Fermicute; see here).
      Gut dysbiosis, and in particular small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, is commonly
characterized by an excess of Gram-negative bacteria (mainly from phyla other than Bacteroidetes),
such as Klebsiella pneumoniae (see here) and E. coli. Alcohol feeds Gram-negative bacteria,
including E. coli, and excessive alcohol consumption is strongly correlated with Gram-negative
bacteria growing very high up the digestive tract, in the duodenum and sometimes even the stomach.
Overgrowth of Gram-negative bacteria causes a huge increase in endotoxins in the gut, which is
released into the gut as the bacteria complete their normal life cycle and die. Since alcohol also
creates a leaky gut, endotoxins can then enter the body. In fact, alcohol seems to especially enhance
the translocation (leaking) of endotoxins into the body.
      Endotoxin, which is actually a group of compounds composed of proteins, lipids, and the toxin
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), is known to be exceptionally able to cause inflammation (via the Toll-like
receptors; see here) and damage tissue.




The term endotoxin is often used interchangeably with LPS since LPS is responsible for most of
the biological properties of endotoxins.

      Another toxin that is produced by both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria is
peptidoglycan (another component of the cell wall that is released into the gut when the bacteria die).
There is evidence that alcohol increases permeability to peptidoglycan and that this toxin is very
effective at stimulating the immune system and causing inflammation.
      Most of the current understanding about the link between alcohol and a leaky gut comes from
studies of chronic alcohol consumption. But there are studies showing that this damage can occur
from a single drink. Even very small amounts of alcohol can damage the lining of the gut, especially
in the upper small intestine (this damage is characterized by loss of epithelium at the tips of the
intestinal villi, villus ulceration, submucosal blebbing, hemorrhagic erosions, and even hemorrhage in
the lamina propria—all of which result in intestinal-barrier dysfunction) and thereby cause a leaky
gut. The severity of the damage to the small intestine caused by a single alcoholic beverage does
make you wonder: how could there be any benefits associated with moderate alcohol consumption?
Occasional drinkers who are also healthy don’t consume enough alcohol to cause bacterial
overgrowth and probably give their bodies enough time to heal between drinks. This might lead to
some adaptive mechanisms (called hormesis); for example, increased production of antioxidants,
which might be part of the reason that low to moderate alcohol consumption may actually provide a
health benefit.
      Alcohol consumption has been linked to increased inflammation in some autoimmune diseases.
An interesting study of the blood of patients who later developed rheumatoid arthritis found that
alcohol consumption correlated with increased markers of inflammation, implying that alcohol may
have contributed to their autoimmune disease. It has also been shown that alcohol consumption
increases the risk of psoriasis and autoimmune liver diseases.
      Unfortunately, alcohol consumption is not conducive to healing an already leaky gut and
remedying existing gut dysbiosis. However, an occasional drink might be tolerated after noticeable
improvements in disease symptoms have been observed (and providing that the drink is gluten-free).
Lysozyme: The Problem with Eggs
Eggs are one of the most allergenic foods, affecting approximately 2–3 percent of the entire
population (compared with the approximately 6 percent of kids and 4 percent of adults who have any
food allergy). One of the main functions of the egg white is to protect the yolk against microbial attack
while the embryo grows. One of the ways it achieves this worthy goal is through the activity of
lysozyme. Lysozyme is an enzyme (a glycoside hydrolase) that is very good at breaking down cell
membrane components of Gram-negative bacteria. In addition, lysozyme does a great job of
transporting these bacterial protein fragments across the gut barrier.
      Lysozyme works specifically and very quickly to break apart peptidoglycans (a type of
glycoprotein in bacterial membranes, especially Gram-negative bacteria); it is very resistant to heat
and is stable in very acidic environments. Humans also produce lysozyme as part of our normal
defense against bacterial infections: it’s in our saliva, tears, and mucus (including the mucus layers in
the intestines). So if we already make our own lysozyme, why is it a problem in egg whites?
      Lysozyme has the ability to form strong complexes with other proteins or protein fragments. This
means that lysozyme from egg whites typically passes through our digestive system in large
complexes with other egg white proteins. Many of the other proteins in egg whites are protease
inhibitors (see here), thus the lysozyme and egg white protein complexes become resistant to our
digestive enzymes. The egg white protease inhibitors that are most likely to be bound to lysozyme are
ovomucin and ovastatin, which are trypsin inhibitors (trypsin is one of our main digestive enzymes);
cystatin, which is a cysteine protease inhibitor; and ovoinhibitor, which is a serine protease inhibitor.
None of these inhibit the activity of lysozyme. As the lysozyme complex travels, largely intact,
through our gut, lysozyme can also bind with bacterial proteins from the bacteria normally present in
our digestive tract (like the Gram-negative E. coli), adding it to the complex.
      Lysozyme also has an unusual chemical property (it maintains a positive charge) that allows it to
cross through the enterocytes by electrostatic attraction to negatively charged glycoproteins
(proteoglycans; an important part of the glycocalyx, see here) embedded in the enterocyte cell
surface.
      Studies have confirmed that consumed lysozyme gets into the circulation (that is, circulates
throughout the body via the blood) even in healthy individuals (and even in conjunction with food
intake as opposed to taking isolated lysozyme as a drug or supplement, although the amount that enters
the circulation is lower). Absorption of pure egg white lysozyme by itself into the circulation is
probably not hazardous (at least in the quantities that you would get from a plate of scrambled eggs;
very high amounts do cause kidney damage). The problem is the other proteins piggybacking on
lysozyme across the gut barrier: the “leak” of other egg white proteins is the reason egg allergies are
so common, and the high likelihood of bacterial proteins leaking out is why eggs (especially the
whites) cause difficulties for those with autoimmune disease.
     It is generally accepted that eggs are not an issue for those with a healthy gut, especially if eaten
in moderate quantities. Eggs are yet another food that you may be able to reintroduce after your
autoimmune disease is in remission (see chapter 9).




The Wonderful World of Antinutrients
Any compound that interferes with digestion or absorption of nutrients is an antinutrient.
Broadly speaking, antinutrients fall into two categories: naturally occurring and synthetic. Most
of the proteins and other compounds addressed in this chapter are antinutrients and are
naturally occurring, including prolamins, agglutinins, digestive-enzyme inhibitors, saponins,
glycoalkaloids, and phytic acid. However, it isn’t necessary to avoid all dietary antinutrients; in
fact, many antinutrients have health benefits when consumed in moderate amounts. (They are
typically toxic at very high levels, but consuming toxic quantities is nearly impossible when
eating whole foods.) Other naturally occurring antinutrients include:




    Cyanogenic Glycosides. Hydrogen cyanide, which is highly toxic, is released from cyanogenic
glycosides when plants that contain them are chewed and digested (through an enzyme that is also
present in the plant). Cassava (also called manioc, yucca, and tapioca and a major ingredient in fufu
flour), sorghum, lima beans, almonds, bamboo, corn, yams (but not sweet potatoes), chickpeas,
cashews, stone fruits (like peaches and apricots), and fruits from the apple family are all food sources
of cyanogenic glycosides. In most cases, the amount of these compounds can be greatly reduced using
traditional preparation methods, which involves soaking (often grinding and then soaking) or
fermenting followed by thorough cooking. Excess cyanide residue from improper preparation is
known to cause acute cyanide intoxication and goiters (because cyanide binds to iodine and depletes
iodine from the body—hence its status as an antinutrient) and has been linked to ataxia (a
neurological disorder affecting the ability to walk). It has also been linked to tropical calcific
pancreatitis, leading to chronic pancreatitis. You can minimize your exposure to cyanogenic
glycosides by not eating the pits or seeds of stone fruits and fruits from the apple family, by eating
only canned bamboo if you’re eating bamboo, and by avoiding fresh cassava (unless you know how to
prepare it traditionally, which involves soaking it for at least twenty-four hours before thoroughly
cooking it).




    Glucosinolates. Glucosinolates are a class of sulfur-rich compounds found in almost all plants
from the Brassicaceae family, which includes all the cruciferous vegetables (cabbage, broccoli,
cauliflower, turnips, Brussels sprouts, and kale). Glucosinolates prevent the uptake of iodine by the
thyroid, so high doses can affect thyroid function (at least when simultaneously iodine deficient; see
here), and thus they are considered goitrogens. Diverse health benefits, including cancer prevention,
have also been correlated with diets high in glucosinolates. These compounds are discussed in more
detail on see here.




     Oxalic Acid and Oxalates. Oxalic acid and its salts, oxalates, are present in many plants,
particularly in members of the spinach family, but also in radishes, berries, grains, and legumes.
Oxalic acid binds to minerals, most notably calcium (and forms calcium oxalate), and thus prevents
its absorption in the body. Because the most common type of kidney stone is largely composed of
calcium oxalate, avoiding foods containing oxalic acid or oxalates has traditionally been
recommended for kidney stone sufferers (gallstone sufferers as well). However, this recommendation
is not supported by the scientific literature, which actually shows the opposite effect—that increasing
the consumption of oxalate-rich foods hinders the formation of kidney stones.




    Purines. Purines are uricogenic nucleic acids—that is, nucleic acids (components of DNA and
RNA) that elevate serum uric-acid levels. Purines are considered antinutrients because they bind
iron. High-purine foods include meat, fish, shellfish, asparagus, cauliflower, spinach, mushrooms,
grains, and legumes. Low-purine diets have traditionally been recommended for those with gout and
hyperuricaemia (high blood levels of uric acid); however, more recent scientific research shows that
refined sugar, and especially fructose, is the more likely culprit. It is clearly more complicated than
“fructose causes gout,” which is not the case: obesity and alcohol consumption are the dominant risk
factors of gout. In fact, consumption of vegetables high in purine is known to decrease the risk of gout,
and so is the consumption of red meat. Regulating blood sugar is by far the most important aspect of
gout management.




    Tannins. Tannins are water-soluble polyphenolic compounds found in grains, legumes, green and
black tea, wine, smoked foods, nuts, and some types of fruit (most notably berries). Tannins are
known antimicrobial compounds and have been linked to some health benefits, most likely because of
their powerful antioxidant properties. However, tannins can bind to and therefore precipitate proteins
(so the proteins clump together and are no longer water soluble) and can therefore reduce amino acid
digestibility. It appears that tannins primarily interact with proline-rich proteins (like lectins), so
these compounds are another factor that hinders the digestion of grains and legumes.
In contrast to naturally occurring antinutrients, those antinutrients that arise from the
processing of foods or are added to processed foods are generally harmful. The following
antinutrients are found in processed foods. They include (but are in no way limited to):




    D-Amino Acids and Lysinoalanine. Exposure of food proteins to heat or alkaline treatments, as in
the production of many processed foods, results in two major chemical changes, including the
concurrent formation of D-amino acids (which are essentially mirror images of the normal L-amino
acids found in both food and our bodies, and which are generally not usable by our bodies, although
some exceptions exist) and lysinoalanine (LAL). These compounds are found in high levels in
pasteurized dairy products, mature cheeses, products made with wheat flour and corn (such as
crackers and corn tortillas), textured soy protein, powdered egg whites, and cured bacon. D-amino
acids and LAL are considered antinutrients because they impair protein digestibility. LAL is also a
strong chelator of (meaning it binds to) minerals, including iron, calcium, copper, and zinc, and
therefore reduces absorption of those minerals.



    Emulsifiers, Thickeners, and Stabilizers. These include a vast variety of food additives, including
xanthan gum, guar gum, carrageenan, cellulose gum, and lecithin. These are polysaccharides, which
are very difficult to digest and are used to emulsify (make fat and water mix) and typically thicken as
well. These chemicals are derived from a variety of sources: guar gum comes from guar beans;
carrageenan is a derivative of red seaweed; xanthan gum is secreted by a specific bacteria; lecithin is
typically isolated from soy but may also be isolated from eggs or sunflower seeds. These are
considered antinutrients because they reduce the absorbability of dietary minerals, such as calcium.
Furthermore, concerns over the safety of some emulsifiers have been raised. For example,
carrageenan has been shown to cause gastrointestinal inflammation, ulcerations, and colitislike
disease in animals. Both carrageenan and guar gum have been shown to increase intestinal
permeability. Xanthan gum (commonly contaminated with gluten because the bacteria are grown in a
medium that most frequently contains wheat, corn, or soy) is a highly efficient laxative and can also
cause intestinal bloating and diarrhea. Cellulose gum (more technically carboxymethylcellulose) is
known to cause massive bacterial overgrowth and inflammation in the small intestine in animals. Gut
microflora metabolites of lecithin have been linked to increased risk of cardiovascular disease and
atherosclerosis, probably by promoting inflammation.




    Oxidized Sulfur Amino Acids. Sulfur-containing amino acids (methionine and cysteine) are
essential for life. However, they may become oxidized during heat and alkaline food processing,
rendering them nutritionally unavailable (or reducing availability). These compounds are commonly
found in pasteurized and heat-processed foods, such as dairy, powdered egg whites, soy products,
and cornmeal.




    Maillard Reaction Products. Maillard reactions are a type of chemical reaction that occurs when
foods undergo thermal processing (like pasteurization, browning, searing, or deep-frying). The
chemical reactions that take place when food is browned are complicated, and Maillard reactions are
just one type. (For example, caramelization, which looks and tastes similar, is a different process.)
Maillard reactions, which occur in stages, essentially happen when certain sugars react with the
amino acid lysine to modify the lysine into a biologically unavailable form. Some Maillard reaction
products (various stages of the modification of lysine) have powerful antioxidant and cancer-
prevention properties, while others (by promoting glycation reactions) have been associated with
increased risk of disease, including cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer’s. They are broadly
considered antinutrients because some Maillard reaction products reduce the digestibility of proteins
(which is an argument against eating deep-fried and fast foods). In terms of reducing protein
digestibility, one of the most affected proteins is pasteurized-dairy protein (another argument against
eating pasteurized dairy). Maillard reactions are a step in the formation of advanced glycation end
products, which are discussed further on see here.

          “If you can’t pronounce it, don’t eat it.”
          MICHAEL POLLAN,
          In Defense of Food




The Relationship Between What You Eat and Your Gut
Microflora

You have almost certainly heard the expression “You are what you eat.” And while this entire chapter
has emphasized that your health depends greatly on your diet, there’s another very important aspect to
your health: the relationship between what you eat and which bacteria like to grow in your gut. You
could just as easily say, “Your gut bacteria are what you eat.”
      When the microbiota of people living in Western cultures was analyzed in comparison with that
of people living in rural settings who had hunter-gatherer–type lifestyles and with that of wild
primates like chimpanzees, our gut microflora was found to be significantly lacking in terms of both
richness and biodiversity. This is directly attributable to diets high in industrially processed foods
(which are also low in fiber), which don’t supply enough of the right nutrition for our microbiota (or
us!) to thrive. Interestingly, there is even less diversity of gut bacteria in obese people than in lean
people: more food does not equal more nutrition, and the worse your diet, the more your gut
microflora suffers.
      Diet is the single biggest influence on microflora composition. In fact, your diet is directly
responsible for more than 60 percent of the variation in bacterial species in your gut. What’s more,
the population of microflora in your gut (types, total and relative quantities, and location) adapts quite
rapidly to changes in your diet, in a matter of a few days to a few weeks. That’s good news.
      It’s not just a question of which kinds of bacteria your diet nourishes but also a question of
bacterial metabolism. Just as a high-sugar diet causes oxidative stress in our bodies (see here), a
high-sugar diet causes oxidative stress in our gut bacteria. Those bacteria adapt by altering their
metabolism, which greatly affects our health.
      Your diet affects gut motility and colonic contractibility, which then influence gut microflora
composition. However, your diet also affects gut microflora composition directly, which then affects
gut motility and colonic contractibility. The impact of gut bacteria on transit largely depends on the
amount and type (fermentable versus nonfermentable) of starches and fibers in the diet. Generally,
transit is well regulated when diets are high in vegetables and fruits. Yet another reason to avoid
grains and legumes as a source of carbohydrates.
      Another important factor to consider is the role that your gut microflora plays in digestion,
vitamin synthesis, and your ability to absorb certain vitamins and minerals. The nutritional value of
your food is actually influenced (at least in part) by the community of bacteria in your gut. The
relationship between your diet, your lifestyle (stress, sleep, circadian rhythms, etc.), and your gut
microflora is complex, and it’s only beginning to be understood in the scientific community.
However, research is starting to show that altering gut microflora can be a powerful way to improve
immune function and control autoimmune disease—but doing so isn’t as easy as supplementing with
probiotics. You need to feed your gut bacteria the right food to encourage the growth of the right
diversity and relative quantities of beneficial microorganisms. To do so, we can take a cue from
contemporary hunter-gatherer populations: the right foods are quality meats, seafood, fruits, and
vegetables. The takeaway is that by improving your diet, you not only improve your health directly
but also bolster your gut microflora, which will then further improve your health.
      It is not an exaggeration to say that gut health is everything. The health of your gut has a profound
effect on your overall health. The gut is the largest and most important barrier between your body and
the outside world. (Yes, it’s bigger than your skin.) It has a very complex task: be selectively
permeable to allow nutrients into the body while maintaining a defense against pathogens and toxins.
And with 80 percent of the immune system housed in the tissues of and surrounding the gut, it is an
essential hub of immunity and immune tolerance. As the connection between intestinal-barrier
function and inflammatory and autoimmune diseases gains more recognition, the role that diet and
lifestyle play is being examined more intensively.
      On the Paleo Approach, foods that foment gut dysbiosis or a leaky gut are avoided. Instead, there
is a focus on foods that help support and maintain gut-barrier function, promote healing both in the gut
and in the entire body, and encourage the growth of normal gut microflora in terms of diversity,
relative quantity, and location. Healing the gut is essential to successfully managing autoimmune
disease. Healing does take time, and the length of time it takes is highly individualized, but
persistence does pay off—and as the gut heals, you can expect to start really feeling better.
Inflammatory and Immunogenic Foods

Inflammation is a major component of autoimmune disease, and indeed of all chronic diseases.
Controlling and alleviating inflammation, then, becomes critical for healing the body and managing
autoimmune disease. There are two key dietary factors that contribute to generalized inflammation in
the body: high-carbohydrate diets, especially those larded with refined carbohydrates, and diets high
in proinflammatory omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids.
      We have been eating exponentially more sugar over the last century, especially in the last three
or four decades. This increase is largely because whole-food sources of carbohydrates have been
replaced with refined carbohydrates and added sugars in processed and manufactured foods. It just so
happens that while sugar consumption has increased, so have obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, cancer, and autoimmune disease. While the evidence for a causal relationship between sugar
consumption and these diseases remains preliminary, there is ample evidence of a link between sugar
consumption and inflammation.
      And as vegetable oils such as soybean oil, corn oil, and canola oil have replaced animal fats
such as butter, lard, and tallow for cooking and eating (see here), we’ve shifted away from saturated
fats (found in animal sources as well as in coconut oil and palm oil) toward polyunsaturated fats,
predominantly proinflammatory, omega-6-fatty-acid-rich vegetable and seed oils (which are
extracted using solvents or a mechanical process called extrusion, which involves high heat and
pressure to extract the oil), to supply the bulk of the fat in our diets. As already discussed, maintaining
the proper ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acids in the diet is imperative for our overall health.
      We know that both excess refined carbohydrates and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids are
major stimuli for inflammation. This means that those with autoimmune disease must address these
issues.




Increase in Sugar Intake and Correlation with Obesity
Reprinted with permission from R. J. Johnson et al., “Potential Role of Sugar (Fructose) in the Epidemic of Hypertension, Obesity, and
the Metabolic Syndrome, Diabetes, Kidney Disease, and Cardiovascular Disease,”American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 86 (2007):
899–906.




Change in Omega-3 versus Omega-6 Fatty Acid Intake




Reprinted with permission from T. L. Blasbalg et al., “Changes in Consumption of Omega-3 and Omega-6 Fatty Acids in the United
States during the 20th Century,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 93 (2011): 950–962.




The Link Between High-Carbohydrate Diets and Inflammation

As previously mentioned, oxidants are a normal by-product of metabolism. The more technical term
for oxidants in this context is reactive oxygen species (or free radicals). Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) are a group of chemically reactive molecules that contain oxygen. ROS form as a natural by-
product of the normal metabolism of oxygen by the mitochondria in our cells as they generate energy
(in the form of a molecule called adenosine triphosphate, or ATP). ROS have important roles in cell
signaling (the complex communication between and within cells) and in homeostasis (maintenance of
a stable environment inside and outside the cell). But ROS are also potent signals for inflammation
and stimulate the production of proinflammatory cytokines. Reactive oxygen species can also damage
cells and tissue. In fact, they are produced and secreted by the cells of the immune system as one
weapon in their arsenal to defend us from pathogens.
      A healthy body has the ability to control both the amount of and the damage caused by reactive
oxygen species. In normal circumstances, the deleterious effects of these highly reactive molecules
are balanced by antioxidants (see here). However, when the production of ROS exceeds the
availability of antioxidants, the resulting imbalance causes problems. Specifically, the
overproduction of ROS stimulates inflammation and damages cells and tissue. This is called
oxidative stress.




      When you eat, regardless of what you eat, your metabolism increases, and this causes an
increase in ROS formation. This is called postprandial oxidative stress, or postprandial
inflammation, and continues to be a topic of intense study. In this sense, all foods are inflammatory—
it is the price we pay for being aerobic organisms. However, some eating patterns cause more
oxidative stress and inflammation than others. Overeating in general is the most important culprit, but
overeating is predominantly a result of high carbohydrate intake (yes, consuming too many
carbohydrates causes you to eat too much).
      When you eat, the energy you consume, whether it comes from carbohydrates, fat, or protein,
must be processed. In general, this is the liver’s job. Recall that for the body to absorb macronutrients
from food, carbohydrates must be broken down into monosaccharides (mostly glucose, since that is
what starches are generally made of, but other sugars such as fructose can be converted into glucose
by the body as well), fats must be broken down into fatty acids, and proteins must be broken down
into amino acids. While amino acids can also be used for energy, this process is secondary and will
not be discussed here.
      Starches (complex carbohydrates) are made of long chains of predominantly glucose, whereas
sugar (sucrose, or table sugar) is composed of a glucose molecule and a fructose molecule. Thus the
majority of the carbohydrates you eat break down to glucose, which rapidly enters the bloodstream.
(Blood-sugar or blood-glucose tests measure how much glucose is in your blood.) Fructose and other
nonglucose simple sugars are converted into glucose, typically by the liver. (Fructose is discussed in
more detail on see here.) Glucose is a major source of energy and can be used by every cell in the
body. (Your cells can also use fat for energy; see here.) However, both too little and too much
glucose in the blood is dangerous, so the body has a variety of mechanisms to maintain blood glucose
within a narrow range.
      When you eat carbohydrates, blood glucose increases. Insulin is released by the pancreas in
response to increased blood sugar and facilitates the transport of glucose into the cells in your body.
However, there’s a maximum amount of glucose that your cells can hold, so whatever is consumed
beyond that amount goes to the liver for processing. Using a bunch of different enzymes, liver cells
(called hepatocytes) first convert that excess glucose into glycogen (which is stored in the liver and in
muscle tissue) for short-term storage. When needed, the glycogen is rapidly converted back into
glucose and released into the blood to maintain normal blood-sugar levels and provide energy for the
body’s cells between meals. There is also a maximum glycogen-storage capacity in the muscle tissue
and liver, so whatever glucose is consumed beyond that amount is converted into triglycerides
(molecules composed of three fatty acids and a glycerol) for longer-term storage in adipocytes (fat-
storage cells). This process is also stimulated by insulin. Triglycerides are released by the liver into
the blood to circulate to adipose tissues (fat deposits), where they are taken up by adipocytes. So
when you eat a high-carbohydrate meal, blood glucose and blood triglycerides are increased.
     High blood-triglyceride levels are a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and reflect the
amount of systemic inflammation in the body. Although excess consumption of carbohydrates is the
major contributor to serum triglycerides, fat metabolism still does play a role. Fatty acids are
absorbed by the enterocytes (in micelles; see here) and then repackaged into structures called
chylomicrons, which circulate through the body via the lymphatic system. (They can also travel in the
blood.) Chylomicrons are essentially transport vehicles for triglycerides. (The core of the
chylomicron is composed of triglycerides with some cholesterol esters, and then the structure is
stabilized by surrounding itself with phospholipids and proteins to make it compatible with the
aqueous environment of the body.) Chylomicrons are processed mainly by adipocytes, which secrete
large amounts of an enzyme (lipoprotein lipase) that breaks apart the chylomicron triglycerides into
free fatty acids at the adipocyte cell surface. The released free fatty acids are then absorbed by the
adipocytes or neighboring cells or can end up in the circulation and be absorbed by any other cell in
the body. The adipocytes then resynthesize triglycerides within the cell for long-term energy storage.
A similar process can also occur within the liver, which may use the fatty acids for a variety of
purposes or resynthesize triglycerides for rerelease into the circulation.
     Overeating stimulates the production of ROS by flooding the body with energy (in the form of
glucose and free fatty acids). Before this energy can be used by cells, the mitochondria in each cell
must convert these glucose molecules and fatty acids into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy
currency for all cells, producing ROS as a by-product (this is called the Krebs cycle). In general, the
more energy consumed, especially in the form of carbohydrates, the more ROS produced.




Insulin as a Hunger Hormone
Besides the vital role insulin plays in the metabolism of fuels, it has an additional role as both a
hunger hormone and an adiposity signal to the brain—that is, it tells the brain whether or not you are
hungry and what the energy status of your body is. The major stimulant of insulin secretion is an
increase in blood-glucose levels, as detected by the pancreas. (Blood-glucose levels go up when you
eat carbohydrates.) Circulating insulin enters the brain (in proportion to the amount that is circulating
in the blood), where it binds to receptors in the hypothalamus. Although the exact details are
unknown, it is understood that through this interaction with the central nervous system, insulin
stimulates a decrease in food intake (conditional on glucose being available in the blood as well).
This makes sense: you eat, your blood-sugar level rises, your body releases insulin to store all that
glucose, and that increase in insulin tells your brain that you’ve got enough energy, thank you very
much.
      The degree of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by the pancreas is a direct function of body
fat. The more body fat, the more insulin is secreted both continuously at a low level and in spikes in
response to eating. (And excessive insulin production is inflammatory.) There is also a maximum
amount of insulin that can cross the blood-brain barrier to stimulate satiety. As the blood
concentration of insulin surges beyond this level, no further signaling to the brain can occur. So the
brain won’t know that you don’t need to eat any more. Hunger hormones are discussed in more detail
here.



      The amount and type of carbohydrate consumed (as well as the health of the individual)
determine how high blood-sugar levels rise after a meal. When blood glucose rises notably, this is
called acute hyperglycemia, more commonly referred to as a glucose spike. Acute hyperglycemia
occurs in everyone after eating a substantial amount of carbohydrates. The difference between acute
hyperglycemia in a healthy person and in a diabetic is just how high blood-glucose levels rise (and
also how exaggerated the spike is compared with the amount of carbohydrates consumed) and how
quickly the body can bring those levels back into a normal range. When blood glucose is chronically
elevated, it is called chronic hyperglycemia and is a diagnostic criterion for diabetes. High blood-
sugar levels after eating are a major stimulator of ROS formation. Carbohydrate quality is certainly a
factor: refined carbohydrates and simple sugars have a far greater impact on blood glucose than the
carbohydrates in whole food (nongrain) sources such as fruits and vegetables largely because of their
fiber content (see here).
      Glucose ingestion, even in healthy people, is associated with increased production of ROS and
proinflammatory cytokines. High-carbohydrate diets cause more postprandial inflammation than low-
carbohydrate diets do, which is exaggerated in people who are obese, have type 2 diabetes, have high
cholesterol, or have metabolic syndrome. This is because postprandial inflammation is proportional
to insulin sensitivity (how effectively the body responds to insulin): the less insulin-sensitive (i.e.,
more insulin-resistant) someone is, the more inflammation is created every time she eats.
Furthermore, insulin resistance is caused by inflammation.
      When blood-sugar levels are chronically elevated, the resulting inflammation stimulates
adaptations within cells, rendering them less sensitive to insulin. These adaptations may include
decreasing the number of receptors to insulin embedded within the cell membranes and suppressing
the signaling within the cell that occurs after insulin binds to its receptor. This causes the pancreas to
secrete more insulin to lower the elevated blood-glucose levels. This is called insulin resistance or
loss of insulin sensitivity, and when blood-sugar levels can no longer be maintained in a normal
range, you get type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance can also be caused by high blood triglycerides and
by certain hormones (discussed more in chapter 3). Insulin resistance also increases the sensation of
hunger because it prevents the brain from receiving signals to the contrary. Low-carbohydrate diets
result in less inflammation than low-fat diets do, probably both because low-carbohydrate diets don’t
cause dramatic spikes in blood glucose (and therefore insulin and inflammation) and because they
increase insulin sensitivity.
      There is also evidence that insulin itself is proinflammatory. A study of healthy subjects who
were intravenously infused with insulin and glucose to achieve hyperinsulinemia (elevated blood
insulin) with controlled (and normal) blood glucose showed that hyperinsulinemia caused an
exaggerated inflammatory response to endotoxin (a toxin from the cell wall of Gram-negative
bacteria). An exaggerated stress response was also observed, meaning that hyperinsulinemia also
contributes to increased cortisol (see here). Another study measured the level of fasting insulin (the
level of insulin first thing in the morning) in volunteers with normal blood-sugar levels and found that
those people with higher fasting-insulin levels also had more markers of inflammation (like C-
reactive protein). When people become insulin-resistant, their pancreas secretes more and more
insulin to handle elevated blood sugar, which also contributes to inflammation and insulin resistance.




     Overconsumption of carbohydrates that spike blood sugar quickly, such as refined carbohydrates
and sugar-laden junk foods, creates a vicious cycle of sugar cravings. This is because a lot of insulin
is needed to clear a lot of glucose out of the blood, but once the glucose is shuttled into the cells of
the body, insulin activity can’t be turned off quickly enough to prevent too much glucose from being
removed from the blood. The result is hypoglycemia, or low blood glucose. This is called reactive
hypoglycemia, and it is responsible for the “sugar crash” that inevitably follows a “sugar high.”
Because low blood-sugar levels trigger the release of hormones involved in the sensation of hunger,
the result is increased appetite and sugar cravings. Insulin is not the only hormone affected by eating
habits that interacts with the immune system. There is actually a complex interplay between many of
the hormones that regulate hunger and energy and the immune system. This is discussed in detail in the
next section and in chapter 3.

Dairy and Insulin




Dairy products and, more specifically, dairy proteins (whey being the biggest culprit) are highly
insulinogenic. This means that even though milk, plain yogurt, cheese, and the like do not contain
enough sugar to cause hyperglycemia and the resulting postprandial inflammation, they do prompt the
release of insulin. In fact, they cause more insulin to be released than white bread does. This is
problematic in two ways. First, high insulin, even in the absence of high blood glucose, stimulates
inflammation. Second, high insulin triggers increased hunger and sugar cravings. Furthermore, studies
have linked high intake of milk with the development of insulin resistance.



     The takeaway here is that blood-sugar regulation is essential for controlling inflammation. The
Western diet is typified by the excessive ingestion of calorie-dense, nutrition-poor foods that cause
abnormal surges in blood-glucose levels. This doesn’t mean that you need to eat a “low-carb diet,”
but that you should avoid eating a high-carb diet. Regulating blood-sugar levels and maintaining
insulin sensitivity are critical for controlling the production of oxidants and inflammatory cytokines.
     Glycemic index and glycemic load are two ways to quantify the effect of a particular food on
blood sugar. High-glycemic-index and -load foods include all grain products, sweetened beverages,
juice, and sugars, including (but not limited to) refined sugar and foods with added sugars. Whole-
grain products have a profound impact on blood glucose: for example, two slices of multigrain bread
increase blood glucose as much as six spoonfuls of sugar. While choosing healthy foods is more
complicated than simply avoiding those foods that spike blood sugar (plenty of low-glycemic load
foods are still unhealthy choices), avoiding high-glycemic-load foods is still an important aspect of a
healthy diet. This is discussed in more detail in chapter 5.
     On the Paleo Approach, the vast majority of your carbohydrates will come from vegetables and
some fruit. Because the protocol focuses heavily on large servings of a variety of vegetables (see
here), most people’s blood-sugar levels will be very well regulated without counting or measuring
carbohydrates or sugars.

The Many Forms of Sugar


Sugar is in everything these days. It is hard to pick up a prepackaged food and not find some form of
sugar on the label. And almost all these foods are devoid of nutrition. The more something is refined
and processed, the less nutrition it has. So what happens when you add sugar (and salt and omega-6
or trans fats) to nutritionally poor foods? First, these foods—through the addition of sugar and salt
and fat—are designed to be addictive (so that you’ll buy more and the companies that make these
foods will earn more money). Second, because your body is not receiving the nutrients it needs from
these foods, you crave more of them. This sets up a vicious cycle and encourages overconsumption,
leading to high blood-sugar levels and insulin resistance.
     I advocate a return to natural sources of sweetness, mainly fruit and even vegetables. When fruit
becomes your dessert, your taste buds will quickly adapt, and it won’t be long before fruit tastes like
a decadent treat even though you are consuming a food rich in antioxidants, vitamins, and minerals.
Ingredients on Labels That Really Spell S-u-g-a-r
When you are reading food labels, it is helpful to know how to decipher which ingredients are
sugar. While most of them are refined, some are unrefined (which typically means that the
sugar retains some minerals). It is also common for manufactured products to contain more than
one form of sugar. The following label ingredients are all forms of sugar:




     agave                      honey




     agave nectar               inulin




     barley malt                invert sugar
barley malt syrup   jaggery




beet sugar          lactose




brown rice syrup    malt syrup




brown sugar         maltodextrin




cane crystals       maltose




cane juice          maple syrup




cane sugar          molasses




caramel             monk fruit (luo han guo)




coconut sugar       muscovado sugar




corn sweetener      palm sugar
corn syrup              panela




corn syrup solids       panocha




crystalline fructose    rapadura




date sugar              raw cane sugar




dehydrated cane juice   raw sugar




demerara sugar          refined sugar




dextrin                 rice bran syrup




dextrose                rice syrup




diastatic malt          saccharose
   evaporated cane juice      sorghum



   fructose                   sorghum syrup




   fruit juice                sucanat




   fruit juice concentrate    sucrose




   galactose                  sugar




   glucose                    syrup




   glucose solids             treacle




   golden syrup               turbinado sugar




   high-fructose corn syrup   yacon syrup




What’s the Difference Between Glycemic Index and Glycemic
Load?
Glycemic index is a measure of how quickly the carbohydrates from a specific food impact your
blood-sugar levels. The higher the glycemic index, the higher (and faster) your blood sugar will rise
after eating a specific food. However, glycemic index does not take into account the carbohydrate
density of a particular food. Glycemic load measures how quickly the carbohydrates from a specific
food impact your blood-sugar levels, taking into account how many carbohydrates are likely to be
consumed in a serving. Some foods have a high glycemic index but a low glycemic load: while the
sugars in those foods are easily absorbed and impact your blood sugar quickly, there aren’t that many
of them, so the net effect is that these foods are often still healthy choices (watermelon is a good
example). The glycemic load of foods included on the Paleo Approach are listed in the nutrient tables
on see here.




Sugar Substitutes: From the Frying Pan into the Fire

Any food that causes elevated blood glucose is not conducive to health. So there has been a surge in
low-glycemic-index sweeteners, heavily marketed to diabetics and those on low-carb diets, which
fall into three categories:
                     Sugars that do not impact blood-glucose levels as quickly or substantially as
                      glucose or glucose-based starches, which are marketed as low-glycemic-index
                      sugars (fructose, inulin)
                     Sugar alcohols (sorbitol, xylitol, erythritol)
                      Nonnutritive sweeteners, including acesulfame potassium, aspartame, neotame,
                      saccharin, and sucralose, as well as the “natural” sugar substitute stevia




Looking for More Great Resources?
For more information about the addictive quality of manufactured foods, check out:



     Our bodies are not designed to metabolize these sugars in the large quantities found in processed
foods. Yes, even foods and tabletop sweeteners that are marketed as “natural sweeteners” (such as
agave nectar and stevia) are not actually natural for our bodies. In most cases, consuming these
glucose substitutes is more harmful than consuming glucose itself.
      Fructose is probably the most destructive and pervasive nonglucose sugar. Because of the
increase of high-fructose corn syrup in manufactured and processed foods, in addition to the increase
in refined-carbohydrate consumption in general, the human diet has never been so full of fructose. For
most of human history, people consumed about sixteen to twenty grams (about half an ounce) a day,
largely from fresh fruits. However, the average now is eighty-five to a hundred grams (as much as
three and a half ounces) a day. Fructose increases blood-triglyceride concentrations and, when
ingested in large amounts as part of a hypercaloric diet, causes insulin resistance, stimulates appetite,
and causes weight gain. In fact, the consumption of large amounts of fructose has been conclusively
linked to obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.
      Fructose is digested and absorbed differently than glucose is. When sugars or starches enter the
digestive tract, they are first broken down into simple sugars (monosaccharides such as glucose and
fructose) by digestive enzymes. Glucose is transported into the body high up the digestive tract and
requires sodium for transport across the gut barrier. By contrast, fructose is absorbed farther down in
the duodenum and jejunum and does not require sodium for transport. After absorption, both glucose
and fructose enter the blood and travel to the liver or other tissues in the body.

          “Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.”
          —WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Richard II

      Fructose both enters the cells and is metabolized differently than glucose is. In most
circumstances, glucose requires insulin in order to enter the cell. Insulin binds to and activates the
insulin receptor, which in turn signals to the cell to increase the number of glucose transporters
(called GLUT4) on the cell surface. By contrast, fructose enters cells via a different transporter
(called GLUT5), which does not depend on insulin. While glucose can be readily converted into
energy (that is, metabolized) by any cell, fructose metabolism occurs predominantly in the liver.
Glucose and fructose are metabolized by many of the same enzymes, although the end products are
very different. Glucose metabolism is a tightly controlled conversion from glucose to glucose-6-
phosphate, which can then be used for ATP production or converted into glycogen or triglycerides for
storage. Fructose, on the other hand, is first converted to fructose-1-phosphate, which is then
converted into a type of simple sugar called a triose, which can be used in glycogen synthesis, but
once glycogen stores are replenished, trioses provide a relatively unregulated source of precursors
for triglyceride synthesis. This means that, when large amounts of fructose are ingested, excessive
production of triglycerides results, which contributes to insulin resistance.



Increase in Fructose Consumption and Correlation with Obesity
*Total fructose includes fructose in monosaccharide, or simple sugar, form and also the fructose content of disaccharides (like sucrose)
and more complex carbohydrates.

** Free fructose (fructose in monosaccharide, or simple sugar, form as opposed to part of a more complex carbohydrate) increase is due
predominantly to high-fructose corn syrup.
Reprinted with permission from G. A. Bray et al., “Consumption of High-Fructose Corn Syrup in Beverages May Play a Role in the
Epidemic of Obesity,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Errata for 79 (2004): 537–543.




Both pancreatic beta cells and the cells of the brain lack GLUT5 transporters.

      There is also evidence that fructose, but not glucose, may cause liver damage by facilitating the
passage of endotoxins across the gut barrier. It remains unknown whether this is by directly affecting
intestinal permeability or by altering the composition of the gut microflora. In a study in which
fructose was injected into small blood vessels in the connective tissue around the gut in rats
(mimicking fructose absorption from food), fructose increased inflammation thanks to oxidative
stress. In another study, fructose was shown to increase cell surface molecules in the cells that line
blood vessels (endothelial cells), which regulate inflammation. Some cancer cells also preferentially
utilize fructose for energy, and high-fructose diets have been linked to increased cancer risk.
      That said, avoiding all dietary fructose is not necessary; in fact, moderate amounts of fructose
are probably beneficial. For example, small quantities of fructose can actually reduce blood-glucose
levels in response to glucose consumption and improve insulin sensitivity. It is simply the
overconsumption of fructose from either concentrated food sources or excessive carbohydrate intake
that you need to worry about. And I do recommend avoiding all fructose-based sweeteners. High-
fructose corn syrup is not the only concentrated source of fructose to watch out for. Agave nectar
contains an average of 70 percent fructose and as much as 90 percent. Yacon syrup and coconut sugar
(or palm sugar) are largely inulin fiber, which is a high-fructose-content fiber and thus breaks down
into fructose in the digestive tract. Sucrose (table sugar, but it’s also the dominant sugar in molasses
and maple syrup) is a disaccharide composed of one glucose and one fructose molecule. In large
quantities, sucrose still provides excessive fructose.
      Fruit in moderation is allowed and endorsed on the Paleo Approach. How much fruit can you
eat? Depending on the type of fruit, two to four servings per day will generally keep fructose intake in
the healthy ten-to-twenty-grams-per-day range. To help you make the best choices, the fructose
content of fruits and vegetables can be found in the nutrient tables here.
      Glucose and fructose are by far the dominant monosaccharides (simple sugars) in the human diet.
There are three other naturally occurring monosaccharides: galactose, xylose, and ribose. Galactose
is one of the monosaccharides that makes up lactose (the other is glucose), which is the primary sugar
found in dairy products. Galactose can bind nonspecifically to proteins and lipids, and for that reason
the body quickly converts it into glucose. Xylose and ribose are not found in significant quantities in
our food supply (xylose is found in wood; ribose is actually found in all living cells, but there’s not
enough of it in food to contribute much to the carbohydrate content).
      Sugar alcohols (also called polyols, which are discussed again here) are hydrogenated forms of
sugars, meaning that they contain a hydroxyl group, which is what makes them technically alcohols.
They are naturally occurring sugars, typically found in small quantities in fruit. However, some sugar
alcohols have been refined and purified for use as sweeteners, including sorbitol, mannitol, xylitol,
and erythritol. These sugar alcohols have gained popularity as sugar substitutes because while they
are relatively less sweet, they also have less of an impact on blood-glucose levels.
      Sugar alcohols are passively and, with the exception of erythritol, incompletely absorbed in the
intestine. They are also fermentable sugars, which means that they feed gut bacteria. In fact, the most
common side effects of sugar-alcohol consumption are severe gastrointestinal symptoms, such as
watery stool, diarrhea, nausea, bloating, flatulence, and borborygmus (the rumbling noise produced
by the movement of gas through the intestines). The dose required to produce the side effects varies
depending on the specific sugar alcohol and the sensitivity of the individual. There is evidence that
sugar alcohols disproportionately feed Gram-negative bacteria and may contribute to gut dysbiosis.
Furthermore, one study showed that the sugar alcohols xylitol and mannitol increase permeability of
epithelial cells (in a cell culture system) by directly opening up tight junctions. Another study showed
that erythritol has a similar effect and causes increased permeability of the epithelial barrier.
Erythritol has also been shown to increase the virulence of bacteria from the Brucella genus, which
includes pathogenic bacteria found in contaminated, unpasteurized milk. While the effect of sugar
alcohols on intestinal permeability in humans has yet to be studied, this should be enough evidence
for avoiding their refined forms.




The Trouble with Stevia
Stevia is often recommended as a natural sugar substitute because it comes from the leaf of a plant
(Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni). It is about three hundred times sweeter than sugar and contains no
glucose. While some experts caution against using purified and manufactured forms of stevia, green-
leaf stevia is typically endorsed. Sweeter than sugar so you don’t have to use much, plus no calories
—sounds great, right? Maybe. But I don’t recommend using stevia, even in its most natural form. The
chemicals responsible for stevia’s sweetness are called steviol glycosides (with at least ten different
steviol glycosides in the stevia plant). Purified or manufactured forms of stevia often isolate one or
two of these steviol glycosides, whereas green-leaf stevia (simply the dried and powdered leaves of
the stevia plant) contains all ten.
      Steviol glycosides are synthesized in the same pathway and end up being structurally very
similar to the plant hormones gibberellin and kaurene, which means that steviol glycosides have a
hormone structure. Although the majority of toxicological studies have established that stevia is safe,
some studies show that it can act as a mutagen and may increase the risk of cancer. (These studies
tend to use quite high concentrations, so they are readily discarded in discussions of the overall safety
of consuming stevia.) Whether or not stevia causes genetic mutations is not the only cause for
concern, however. For those with autoimmune disease, in which hormones have such a huge impact
on disease development and progression, the potential effect of stevia on sex hormones is worrisome.
      There is evidence that steviol glycosides have contraceptive effects in both males and females.
In particular, one specific steviol glycoside, called stevioside, has been shown to have potent
contraceptive properties in female rats, implying that stevia may have an impact on estrogen,
progesterone, or both. In another study, male rats fed stevia extracts showed a decrease in fertility,
reduced testosterone levels, and testicular atrophy, potentially attributable to binding of steviol
glycosides with an androgen receptor. While the initial animal studies were successfully repeated by
other researchers, other conflicting studies have detected no effect of stevia on fertility. No studies
have evaluated the impact of stevia on fertility in humans, but the stevia plant was traditionally used
to control the fertility of women by the Guarani Indians. While small and occasional consumption of
stevia is probably not detrimental to health in general, those with altered hormone balance and
dysfunctional immune systems should avoid it.




The simplest sugar alcohols—ethylene glycol and methanol—are the notoriously toxic chemicals
used in antifreeze.

     Nonnutritive sweeteners are substances that taste sweet but don’t provide substantial calories.
They include acesulfame potassium, aspartame, neotame, and sucralose, as well as the “natural”
sugar substitute stevia (see above) and have been linked to increased risk of obesity and metabolic
syndrome. For example, studies have shown that the more diet soda you consume, the more likely you
are to be overweight or obese and to develop metabolic syndrome; sugar-free soda, it turns out, has a
greater impact on these conditions than any other dietary factor. In fact, in animal studies, the
consumption of nonnutritive sweeteners causes a significant increase in body weight even with no
change in food intake, which implies that these sweeteners affect metabolism or hormones.
     In some people, the consumption of nonnutritive sweeteners causes the release of insulin in what
is called cephalic phase insulin release. This means that the body releases insulin upon tasting
something sweet in anticipation of a blood-sugar increase (because the sweet-taste receptors on the
tongue generate nerve impulses that are relayed to the brain). In the case of sugar consumption, this
prerelease of insulin helps control blood-sugar levels. However, in the case of nonnutritive
sweeteners, this causes hyperinsulinemia (because of the absence of elevated blood sugar), the effects
of which were discussed here. Cephalic phase insulin release seems to happen in some people and
not others, and why is not clearly understood.




Preservatives, Colorings, Artificial Flavors, and Other Additives




A number of health concerns surround the chemicals commonly added to manufactured and processed
foods. Preserved foods in general increase the risk of some cancers. Excessive nitrites (commonly
added to processed meats) are linked to increased risk of cancer. Colorings and preservatives
increase hyperactivity in children. Sulfites (used to prevent discoloration or browning of many foods
through preparation, storage, and distribution; see here) are linked to asthma. Phosphates (used as a
preservative in meats, dairy, and seafood and as flavoring agents, acidifying agents, and emulsifiers
in processed foods) are linked to kidney disease. Furthermore, sensitivities to these chemicals are
common. While studies specifically evaluating the effects of these chemicals on autoimmune disease
have not been performed, there is enough information in the scientific literature to suggest that
avoiding foods that contain these additives is a good idea. Of course, if you adopt the
recommendations in The Paleo Approach, you won’t have to worry about these chemicals.
     Recent studies show that nonnutritive sweeteners have physiological effects that alter appetite
and glucose metabolism. There is evidence that these sweeteners bind to receptors on
enteroendocrine cells (specialized cells in the gastrointestinal tract that interact with the endocrine
system and secrete hormones) and pancreatic islet cells (cells in the pancreas that secrete the
hormones insulin and glucagon). By interacting with these endocrine cells, nonnutritive sweeteners
can either stimulate or inhibit hormone secretion. In particular, there is evidence that nonnutritive
sweeteners cause an increase in the secretion of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1; see here) by
enteroendocrine cells, which signals to the pancreas to increase the secretion of insulin and decrease
the secretion of glucagon. Again, this results in hyperinsulinemia in the absence of elevated blood
sugar.
     There may also be some direct effects of nonnutritive sweeteners on inflammation. For example,
aspartame increases oxidative stress and inflammation in the brain, although how remains unknown.
     There is no way to cheat desserts. I don’t recommend any sugar substitutes. As much as high
glucose levels are detrimental, the body can actually handle real sugar better than it can any of the
manufactured or isolated substitutes. But your taste buds will quickly adapt to a diet rich in nutrient-
dense whole foods, and you will soon find that fruits and vegetables and the occasional minimally
sweetened dessert will satisfy your sweet cravings. It’s important to emphasize that the Paleo
Approach is not a low-carb or no-sugar diet: treats are OK on occasion (see here). But blood-sugar
levels must be regulated, which means that portion size is important. Also, regulating blood sugar is
much more difficult in those with a history of obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiovascular
disease, or metabolic syndrome or those who are under chronic stress or have adrenal insufficiency
because of insulin resistance. It will be important for those people to keep a very close eye on their
carbohydrate intake (both quality and quantity), especially initially (see here and here).

Bad Fats and Good Fats

Yes, fat again. Adequate intake of the right kinds of fat is crucial. We’ve already discussed the
importance of consuming quality (animal) fats in terms of dietary supply and absorption of fat-soluble
vitamins (see here), and we’ve already introduced the fact that dietary insufficiency of omega-3 fatty
acids (in relation to omega-6 fatty acids) plays a role in the development of autoimmune disease.
There is one more essential topic for discussion when it comes to dietary fats: their role in
inflammation.
     You shouldn’t be afraid to eat fat, but you should also understand that not all fats are created
equal. Some fats support inflammation, while others reduce it. Because inflammation is a key feature
of autoimmune disease, eating more anti-inflammatory fats (and fewer proinflammatory fats) is
crucial. The majority of this discussion will relate to the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids, the
importance of which was already introduced on see here.

Omega-6 versus Omega-3 Revisited

Recall that omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids are the only essential dietary fatty acids.
As already discussed, a variety of inflammatory chronic diseases have been associated with the
increased dietary intake of omega-6 fatty acid seen in recent decades, resulting in a dietary-intake
ratio of omega-6s to omega-3s somewhere between 10:1 and 25:1 for most Americans. By contrast,
most experts agree that we are designed to function optimally when that ratio is between 1:1 and 4:1.
      Omega-6 fatty acids have a bad reputation for being proinflammatory. While it is true that an
excessive intake of omega-6s in relation to omega-3s is a major contributor to inflammation and to a
huge variety of (if not all) chronic diseases, it is also important to recognize that omega-6s are also
essential for life. In particular, arachidonic acid (AA, which the body metabolizes from dietary
linoleic acid) is an important component of all cell membranes. And while arachidonic acid is also
an important proinflammatory mediator (mediators are compounds that control or activate functions in
other cells, acting like a signal or a directive), its effects are not ubiquitously inflammatory. (It
increases some cytokines while reducing others.) Therefore, controlling inflammation is not about
eliminating omega-6 fatty acids completely—it’s about balance.
      Omega-3 fatty acids are also essential and tend to be deficient in Western diets (see here). The
body mainly uses two omega-3s—the long-chain eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which is twenty
hydrocarbons long, and the very-long-chain docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which is twenty-two
hydrocarbons long. You’ve probably seen shoutouts for DHA and EPA on egg cartons and fish oil
supplements. Both of these omega-3 fatty acids can be metabolized by the body from the shorter-chain
alpha linolenic acid (ALA), but the conversion of ALA to EPA or DHA is an extremely inefficient
process. In fact, some researchers are suggesting a change in the designation of ALA as an essential
omega-3 fatty acid, since what are actually essential for health are EPA and DHA.




The Link Between Omega-6 Fats and Gut Dysbiosis
The detrimental effects of too much omega-6 fatty acid in the diet extend beyond inflammation and
messing with the immune system. A recent study showed that diets with an overabundance of omega-6
fatty acids promoted bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine (specifically, the ileum) of mice.
Furthermore, the growth of desirable probiotic bacteria from the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla
were depleted (the importance of these probiotic bacteria are discussed more here and here), leading
to gut dysbiosis. The study also warned that high doses of fish oil supplementation can cause
oxidative stress (while returning gut microflora to normal). This probably happens because, once
isolated, the omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in fish oil are easily oxidized (see here). This is an
argument for:
                    Reducing omega-6 fatty acid intake instead of just boosting omega-3 fatty acid
                    intake with supplements
                     Getting omega-3 fats from whole-food sources, such as fish, shellfish, and
                    pasture-raised meats, instead of from high doses of fish oil



    The reason the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids is important is that these two types of fat
compete for many of the same functions in the body (in particular, AA competes against EPA and
DHA), but depending on which fat is used, the effect is actually different. As already mentioned, the
outer membrane of every cell is composed of lipids arranged in what is called a bilayer (literally a
double layer, with the “tails” of the lipids facing in and the “heads” facing out; see here). Within that
bilayer, various fatty acids and proteins are inserted, such as cholesterol molecules, receptors, and
yes, AA, EPA, and DHA. Basically AA, EPA, and DHA are stored in the cell membrane. When
needed, they can be internalized and metabolized into prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes
(more on this shortly).
      When diets contain predominantly omega-6 fatty acids, there is far more AA than DHA and EPA
in the cell membranes. However, when diets are supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids, EPA and
DHA can readily replace AA in the membranes of practically all cells, including many of the key
players of the immune system, such as monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes (like neutrophils), and
lymphocytes, as well as some other key cell types, such as erythrocytes (red blood cells), platelets,
endothelial cells (the cells that line blood vessels), neuronal cells, and hepatic cells (liver cells).
When incorporated into the lipid bilayer, DHA and EPA affect cell membrane properties, such as
fluidity, flexibility, and permeability, and alter the activity of enzymes that are embedded in the
membrane. These effects are beneficial to the health and function of the cell. For example, having a
more flexible and fluid membrane for a phagocytic cell (an “eater” cell like a macrophage, dendritic
cell, or neutrophil) means that it is efficient at doing its job of “eating up” pathogens. This is good
news because it helps the immune system function normally. When inflammatory cells work the way
they are supposed to, you don’t get the snowball effect of inflammatory cells secreting cytokines to
recruit more inflammatory cells that secrete more cytokines. This is confirmed in studies where
supplementation of DHA and EPA reduces the production of inflammatory cytokines.
      The availability of AA as opposed to EPA and DHA in the cell membrane profoundly influences
the production of messenger molecules of the autocrine and paracrine systems, specifically
prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes, which are fat-based, hormonelike molecules.
Technically, they are not hormones, since they are not produced in a specific organ and released into
the body, but are called autocrines or paracrines, depending on whether they are used as signals
within a cell (autocrine) or as signals with a neighboring cell (paracrine). Essentially, these are
short-distance, fat-based, communication molecules, whereas hormones are long-distance.
Prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes are classes of messenger molecules produced by
many cells throughout the body that are important mediators of a variety of functions, including
inflammation. There are many different prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes (and many
different receptors for these molecules), each with its own function.

Prostaglandins. These have essential roles in a variety of systems in the human body, including as
regulators of blood clotting, pain signaling, cell growth, kidney function, stomach acid secretion, and
inflammation. The competition between omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids profoundly impacts the type
of prostaglandin that is formed and therefore the signal that it conveys and the effect in the body. In
particular, depending on the relative availability of AA as opposed to EPA and DHA fatty acids in
the cell membrane, different prostaglandins are formed. When AA dominates (because there are too
many omega-6 relative to omega-3 fatty acids present), the prostaglandin E2 is formed, which is a
potent mediator of pain and inflammation and has been linked to rheumatoid arthritis. When diets are
supplemented with EPA and DHA fatty acids, prostaglandin E2 formation decreases and prostacyclin
I3 is formed, which has potent anti-inflammatory and antithrombotic (meaning it prevents thrombosis;
that is, pathological blood clots) properties and promotes healthy blood vessels. This may be why
increasing omega-3 fatty acids correlates so strongly with a reduction in cardiovascular disease.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), like aspirin and ibuprofen, work by reducing the
formation of prostaglandins. But these drugs often have unwanted side effects, such as GI-tract
bleeding, as a result of this lack of prostaglandin activity. NSAIDs are discussed in more detail
here.


Thromboxanes. These are produced by platelets and serve an essential function in blood clotting by
simultaneously causing platelet aggregation (clumping) and vasoconstriction (the constricting or
shrinking in diameter of blood vessels). As is the case with prostaglandins, the availability of omega-
3 versus omega-6 fatty acids impacts the type of thromboxane formed. When AA dominates in the cell
membrane, thromboxane A2, a potent platelet aggregator and vasoconstrictor, is formed. However,
when diets are supplemented with EPA and DHA fatty acids, thromboxane A2 production decreases
and thromboxane A3, a weak platelet aggregator and a weak vasoconstrictor, is formed. This is
probably why high omega-3 fatty acid diets prevent cardiovascular disease—through reductions in
blood clot formation. This is also why fish oil supplementation can be very helpful for those prone to
blood clot formation.

Leukotrienes. These are synthesized primarily by inflammatory cells and are essential mediators of
inflammatory and immune reactions. Again, competition between omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids
impacts the type of leukotriene formed. When AA dominates in the cell membrane, leukotriene B4 is
formed, which is a powerful chemotactic agent (basically a chemical signal that recruits white blood
cells out of the blood and into the tissue). When diets are supplemented with EPA and DHA fatty
acids, the amount of leukotriene B4 formation decreases and leukotriene B5 is formed. While still
proinflammatory, leukotriene B5 is ten times less potent than leukotriene B4.




A variety of leukotriene-receptor antagonists (drugs that block the signaling of leukotrienes) are
routinely prescribed to treat asthma.

     In the early phase of inflammation, excessive amounts of cytokines as well as prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, and leukotrienes are released. Therefore, the type of fatty acid available for
prostaglandin, thromboxane, and leukotriene synthesis plays a crucial role in the regulation of
inflammatory responses. When both AA and EPA or DHA are present in the cell membrane, the
production of lipid mediators of inflammation allows for self-regulation. Basically, metabolism of
AA contributes to strong proinflammatory signals (which is a normal first response by the innate
immune system to a foreign invader), but then EPA and DHA are used to compete with AA and thus
produce fewer inflammatory signals. This means that while the body is sending signals to cause
inflammation to deal with an immediate threat, the body is also sending signals to control that
inflammation and make sure it doesn’t get out of hand. But if you don’t have enough EPA and DHA
available, those modulating signals aren’t strong enough, and the inflammation continues. This is why
eating a diet too rich in omega-6 fatty acids is harmful. This is also why an abundance of studies
show that supplementing the diet with omega-3 fatty acids (typically in the form of fish oil) reduces
inflammation.




What About Omega-9 Fatty Acids?
Yes, omega fatty acids come in more than just 3s and 6s. There are also omega-9 fatty acids, although
much less is known about how they interact with the body. Oleic acid, an omega-9 fatty acid in
olives, olive oil, avocados, avocado oil, walnuts, and macadamia nuts, has anti-inflammatory
properties. It is actually a long-chain monounsaturated fat with the double bond between the ninth and
tenth carbon atoms. There are also omega-9 polyunsaturated fats, which have more than one double
bond.
      Some researchers postulate that the health benefits associated with higher olive oil consumption
—for example, in the Mediterranean diet—can be attributed to the effects of oleic acid in conjunction
with the higher antioxidant content of olive oil (especially cold-pressed virgin and extra-virgin olive
oil) rather than its generally high monounsaturated-fat content.




     However, omega-3 fatty acids have roles beyond the innate immune system. They are also
important regulators of the adaptive immune system, although the exact mechanisms remain a topic of
intense study (but are apparently through cytokine production and through control of gene expression).
Supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids (from fish oil) has been shown to drastically reduce the
activation of dendritic cells, leading to a reduction in antigen presentation and profound reductions in
proinflammatory cytokine release, which directly impacts responses by the adaptive immune system.
In addition, DHA and EPA have direct effects on the differentiation (maturation) of naïve T cells,
inhibiting the development of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells.
      Studies are starting to tease out the different effects of DHA and EPA, and the results so far are
pretty intriguing. While EPA is clearly still beneficial, the immune-modulatory effects of DHA appear
to be stronger. This is because in lymphocytes, DHA and EPA regulate expression of genes that
control lymphocyte proliferation (division) and differentiation (maturation) differently. In particular,
activation of dendritic cells and production of cytokines that stimulate naïve T-cell differentiation
into Th1, Th2, and Th17 subtypes are all reduced by DHA supplementation alone. Furthermore, DHA
supplementation has been shown to directly impact a variety of genes (or, rather, transcription
factors, which are proteins that control gene expression and thus protein production) involved in the
generation of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells.
      A number of clinical trials have shown benefits (though sometimes modest) of dietary
supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids in several inflammatory and autoimmune diseases,
including rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, psoriasis, lupus erythematosus,
multiple sclerosis, and migraine headaches. In fact, in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
supplementation with fish oil led to substantial improvements in joint swelling, pain, and morning
stiffness and enabled them to reduce their use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Supplementation is beneficial because it helps correct the balance of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid
intake. The Paleo Approach goes one very important step further because it focuses not only on
increasing omega-3 fatty acids (from whole-food sources such as fish, shellfish, and pasture-raised
meats) but also on decreasing omega-6 fatty acids (by avoiding processed vegetable oils, grains,
legumes, nuts, and seeds). Achieving the proper ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids will
contribute substantially to the management of autoimmune disease and to overall health.




Some Beneficial Omega-6 Fatty Acids
Let’s not throw the baby out with the bathwater. There are two beneficial omega-6 fatty acids
worth discussing.
    Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) is one of the very few naturally occurring trans fatty acids (see
here). Specifically, it is an isomer of linoleic acid (meaning that its molecular formula is the same,
but because the geometry of a double bond is different, it ends up being a different shape). The main
natural sources of CLA are meat and dairy from grass-fed ruminants (like cows, goats, and sheep).
CLA has been shown to provide a variety of health benefits, including reducing obesity,
atherosclerosis, cardiovascular diseases, osteoporosis, diabetes, insulin resistance, inflammation,
and various types of cancer, especially breast cancer. In Crohn’s disease patients, CLA
supplementation was shown to suppress the ability of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to produce
inflammatory cytokines and also inhibited proliferation (division) of T cells. While dietary CLA is
certainly beneficial, concerns have been raised in the scientific literature about CLA supplementation
regarding effects on liver functions, glucose metabolism, and oxidative stresses and decreasing the fat
content of breast milk.
    Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) is an omega-6 fatty acid that enhances the anti-inflammatory effect
of omega-3 fats. It is a desaturated form of linoleic acid, meaning that it has one more double bond
than linoleic acid does, and the first double bond is still in the omega-6 position. In the body, GLA is
converted into another fatty acid called dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid (DGLA), which also competes
with AA for insertion into the cell membranes. Furthermore, like EPA and DHA, DGLA can be
metabolized to form prostaglandins and thromboxanes. Specifically, when DGLA is available in the
cell membrane, prostaglandin E1 is formed, which has anti-inflammatory and antithrombotic
properties. Increased DGLA also results in decreased production of thromboxane A2 and, because
DGLA cannot be metabolized into leukotrienes, decreased production of the proinflammatory
leukotrienes metabolized from AA. GLA, which has been shown to be beneficial in rheumatoid
arthritis, is found in leafy green vegetables as well as supplements like borage oil and evening
primrose oil.




Saturated and Monounsaturated Fats

While omega-6 fatty acids, rather than omega-3s, are the more likely culprits when it comes to
inflammation and immune-system activation in autoimmune disease, researchers are starting to
evaluate the effects of both saturated and monounsaturated fats.
     A number of studies have shown that replacing dietary saturated fatty acids with
monounsaturated fatty acids has a variety of benefits, resulting in less postprandial inflammation (see
here) and an overall reduction in inflammation in people suffering from obesity or metabolic
syndrome. Animal studies have revealed that monounsaturated fatty acids can modulate the innate
immune system in a manner similar to omega-3 fatty acids (although the effect is weaker). Higher
monounsaturated fatty acid intake reduces inflammation by decreasing the activity and rate of cell
division of natural killer cells and by decreasing the activity and recruitment of monocytes from the
blood into the tissues (see here).

   Concentrated Food Sources of Omega-6s to Avoid




Probably the most important strategy for normalizing your omega-6 to omega-3 intake is to
reduce your consumption of foods rich in omega-6 polyunsaturated fats, most notably vegetable
and seed oils and nut oils, including:


     almond oil
     canola oil (rapeseed oil)
     cashew oil
     corn oil
     cottonseed oil
     hazelnut oil
     peanut oil
     pecan oil
     pine nut oil
     pistachio oil
     safflower oil
     sesame oil
     soybean oil
     sunflower oil


The polyunsaturated fats in grains and legumes are predominantly omega-6 fatty acids. Also, when
animals raised for meat are fed diets rich in grains (typically wheat, corn, and soy), the proportion of
omega-6 fatty acids in fat rises as well. Poultry is also high in omega-6s compared with omega-3s,
even when pasture-raised.
     By avoiding grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, and processed vegetable oils and by eating seafood
and pasture-raised meat as much as possible, omega-6 intake will decrease substantially and the ratio
of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids will come naturally into balance.



      So just because monounsaturated fats are healthy, does that mean saturated fats are unhealthy? As
already discussed, saturated fats are the most stable fats, the most difficult to oxidize, and the easiest
for the body to break apart and use for energy (because they have no double bonds). And note: when
saturated fat intake is high and carbohydrate intake is low, inflammation decreases significantly (even
when omega-6 fatty acid intake eclipses omega-3 fatty acids). Furthermore, the more saturated fat in a
food, the better source of fat-soluble vitamins it tends to be.
      The Paleo Approach focuses on balancing omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids as well as on quality
(rather than quantity) and variety of saturated and monounsaturated fats. Tallow (rendered beef or
lamb fat); lard (rendered pork fat); and duck fat from grass-fed, pastured sources; plus coconut oil,
red palm oil, olive oil, and avocado oil are all great sources of healthy fats, in addition to the fats in
the whole foods themselves. The best sources of fats for eating and cooking are discussed in more
detail here.

Hunger Hormones and Inflammation
There is a complex interplay between some of the hormones that regulate hunger and the immune
system. Understanding what these hormones do, how they interact with the immune system, and which
dietary factors contribute to their regulation (or dysregulation) is important for making diet and
lifestyle choices conducive to healing and general health.
      The feeling of hunger is regulated by a complex system of hormones that interact with
neurotransmitters and neurotransmitter receptors in the hypothalamus region of the brain. These
hormones activate or deactivate specific neurons in the hypothalamus that control hunger. These
neurons have receptors to neuropeptide Y (NPY), the essential neurotransmitter in regulating hunger.
The hormones can increase or decrease hunger by binding the receptors for NPY or by increasing or
decreasing levels of NPY itself. Generally, a hormone will increase hunger if it activates NPY
neurons, whereas you will feel satiated if a hormone deactivates the NPY neurons. The interplay
between these hormones is only partly understood, and new hormones and their roles in regulating
appetite, satiety, metabolism, and digestion continue to be discovered. The key players are
summarized above.




Hunger Hormones: The Key Players
Hormones That Tell Your Body You’re Satiated
    Cholecystokinin (CCK) is secreted by the cells that line the duodenum (the first segment of the
small intestine) when they detect the presence of fat. This causes the release of digestive enzymes
from the pancreas and bile from the gallbladder. Increased levels of CCK signal to the stomach to
slow down digestion so that the small intestine can digest the fats. CCK is also a neuropeptide, like
neuropeptide Y (NPY), the essential neurotransmitter in regulating hunger, and affects the neurons in
the brain to signal satiety. This is the most immediate hunger-suppressing signal and is the reason that
eating fat with your meals is so important.
    Oxyntomodulin is released in response to protein and carbohydrates in the stomach and signals a
change in energy status to the brain. Oxyntomodulin enhances digestion by delaying gastric emptying
and decreasing gastric-acid secretion.
    Peptide YY (PYY) is released by cells that line the jejunum, the ileum (the next two segments of
the small intestine), and the colon in response to eating and is especially sensitive to protein. PYY
signals to the gallbladder to stop secreting bile and to the pancreas to stop producing digestive
enzymes. PYY is important in increasing the efficiency of digestion and nutrient absorption after
meals by slowing down gastric emptying, slowing down digestion, and increasing water and
electrolyte absorption in the colon. PYY inhibits NPY receptors in the hypothalamus, thereby turning
off hunger signals.
    Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is secreted in the ileum in response to carbohydrate, protein,
and fat. It rapidly enters the circulation and is one of the fastest and shortest-lived satiety signals. It
inhibits acid secretion and gastric emptying in the stomach, increases insulin secretion, and decreases
glucagon secretion. GLP-1 decreases hunger signals by reducing the amount of NPY.
     Leptin plays a key role in regulating energy intake and expenditure, including appetite and
metabolism. Leptin is released by adipocytes (fat cells) and by the cells that line the stomach, so it
signals both that the body has been fed and that there is sufficient stored energy. This appetite
inhibition is long-term, in contrast to the quick suppression of hunger by CCK and the slower
suppression of hunger between meals mediated by PYY. Leptin both rapidly inhibits NPY production
and deactivates NPY neurons in the brain to signal that the body has had enough to eat, producing a
feeling of satiety. It is also one of the most important adipose-derived hormones.
    Adiponectin is secreted from adipose tissue into the bloodstream, where it signals decreased
gluconeogenesis (the conversion of fats and proteins into glucose for energy), increased glucose
uptake, lipid catabolism (breaking down of fats), triglyceride clearance (storage of fats), increased
insulin sensitivity, and control of energy metabolism. Adiponectin acts directly on NPY neurons in a
similar way as leptin, but its effects are on top of the actions of leptin.

Hormones That Tell Your Body You’re Hungry
    Ghrelin is considered the main hunger hormone and the counterpart of leptin. It is secreted by the
cells that line the stomach when the stomach is empty and also by the pancreas when it detects low
blood sugar. Also, the liver secretes ghrelin when its glycogen storage runs low (and glucagon is
high). When ghrelin is released into the circulation, it activates NPY neurons to stimulate appetite.
Increased levels of ghrelin bring on the sensation of hunger. Ghrelin is a potent stimulator of growth
hormone (GH) secretion and regulates nutrient storage, thereby linking nutrient partitioning with
growth and repair processes. Ghrelin activates several anti-inflammatory pathways in the body and
promotes cell regeneration, thereby promoting healing, especially within the gastrointestinal tract.
Ghrelin regulates glucose homeostasis through a direct action on the pancreatic islet cells (the cells
that secrete insulin). It is also important for memory function and gastrointestinal motility.
    Cortisol is well known as the master stress hormone, but it has key roles in regulating metabolism
and hunger. Cortisol levels determine whether the body uses glycogen stores (stored carbohydrate) or
triglyceride stores (stored fat) for energy. Cortisol can also stimulate gluconeogenesis, the process of
converting amino acids (proteins) and lipids (fats) into glucose in the liver. It is believed that cortisol
affects appetite by acting on NPY neurons in the brain and affects NPY and leptin levels. Cortisol
seems to have a particular effect on the desire to eat foods high in fat and sugar. This is why stress
management (which really means controlling any factor that might mess with your natural cortisol
levels) is so important.
     Glucagon is a hormone secreted by the pancreas when it detects low blood-glucose levels
(typically between meals, but also as part of the “sugar crash” after eating something high in
carbohydrates). Glucagon tells the liver to convert stored glycogen into glucose, which is released
into the bloodstream, a process known as glycogenolysis. When glycogen stores are low, high
glucagon levels drive gluconeogenesis. Increased glucagon amplifies the hunger sensation.
    Insulin is secreted by the pancreas in response to high blood-glucose levels. It causes cells in the
liver, muscle, and fat tissue to take up glucose (and fatty acids in the case of adipocytes) from the
blood, storing it as glycogen. While insulin is released as a result of eating carbohydrates, it
paradoxically increases hunger as opposed to decreasing it. (Insulin signals satiety only when
secreted in moderate amounts and in conjunction with elevated blood-glucose levels.) This is caused
by direct action on the NPY neurons and is the reason that eating a high-carb meal is not as satiating
as eating a meal that includes fats and proteins. It also explains why we feel hungry again so soon
after a sugary snack.
     The four hunger hormones that also play key roles as modulators of the immune system are
insulin, cortisol, leptin, and ghrelin. The proinflammatory effects of insulin have already been
discussed (see here). Cortisol, the master stress hormone, is discussed in detail in chapter 3. The
roles of leptin and ghrelin in terms of immune function will, however, be discussed here.

Leptin. Fat-storage cells, or adipocytes, produce leptin, a hormone that acts as a negative-feedback
control for adiposity (fatness). Leptin is secreted by adipocytes in direct proportion to the amount of
stored body fat, in particular the amount of subcutaneous fat. Similarly to insulin, circulating leptin
enters the brain, where it binds to receptors. (There are receptors for leptin in the hypothalamus but
also in several other areas of the brain.) The exact details of how this works are unknown, but it is
understood that leptin’s interaction with the brain stimulates a reduction in food intake and an
increase in energy expenditure. Essentially, if you have an adequate amount of fat stores, leptin is
released and tells your brain that you have enough energy, so you don’t need to eat any more, and,
hey, let’s get moving! However, the body can become leptin-resistant, which is analogous to being
insulin-resistant, although leptin resistance can be a consequence both of obesity and
overconsumption of food and of fasting or consuming too few calories and losing weight.
      It was initially believed that leptin’s dominant role was to tell the brain to stop eating. However,
recent studies have shown that leptin also controls the adaptation to fasting. Fasting or consuming too
few calories on a regular basis can decrease leptin sensitivity, which leads to increased hunger,
cravings, and lack of energy. The reason it’s so hard to keep weight off after going on a diet is that
reduced leptin sensitivity causes lowered metabolism and increased hunger, a combination that tends
to lead to weight gain. There is also a link between leptin and cortisol release, potentially explaining
the cortisol spike that many people experience in response to intermittent fasting (see here).
      Leptin is not just a hunger hormone. It is also connected to the regulation of reproductive,
thyroid, and growth hormones and the adrenal axes. Leptin promotes angiogenesis (the growth of
blood vessels), regulates wound healing, and controls hematopoiesis (the production of blood cells).
Of most relevance to those with autoimmune disease, leptin seems to be an essential regulatory
protein of both the innate and the adaptive immune systems.
      As a hunger hormone, leptin is produced both by adipose tissue and by the cells that line the
stomach. However, leptin is also produced by cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems
(specifically macrophages and T cells), and leptin production increases enormously during acute
infection and inflammation. The structure (and therefore function) of leptin is very similar to that of an
inflammatory cytokine (and the structure of the leptin receptor is very similar to inflammatory
cytokine receptors). Leptin receptors are found in the cell membranes of monocytes, macrophages,
neutrophils, dendritic cells, natural killer cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and B cells (see chapter
1). Given leptin’s similarity to cytokines, those ever-important messengers of inflammation and
immunity, it is not surprising that leptin plays a role in the immune system. But perhaps it is surprising
that leptin regulation is vital for the normal functioning of both the innate and the adaptive immune
systems.
      Leptin regulates the innate immune system in a variety of ways. It stimulates the production and
secretion of proinflammatory cytokines by macrophages and monocytes and promotes the phagocytic
function of these cells. Leptin supports the release of reactive oxygen species by neutrophils and
inhibits neutrophil apoptosis (programmed cell death). Leptin also has wide regulatory actions on
natural killer cells by affecting proliferation (division), differentiation (maturation), activation, and
cytotoxicity (their abilities to damage their targets). Leptin also regulates the migration of dendritic
cells from the gut to the lymph nodes, where they can present antigens to the cells of the adaptive
immune system (see here).
      Leptin is also an essential regulator of the adaptive immune system. It increases the proliferation
of naïve T cells (but inhibits proliferation of memory T cells), promotes cytokine production by T
cells, and is an important regulator of Th1 and Th2 cell polarization. In some circumstances, leptin
drives Th1 dominance; in other circumstances, it drives Th2 dominance, suggesting that imbalances in
leptin production might be involved in the dysregulation of T-cell immunity. Furthermore, leptin
enhances Th17 cell populations and decreases proliferation of regulatory T cells. Short-term
starvation, fasting, and nutritional deprivation have been shown to acutely lower leptin levels
(remember that prolonged fasting and nutritional deprivation elevates leptin), and adaptive immunity
is suppressed as a direct result. When leptin is deficient, the thymus gland atrophies, and the number
of CD4+ lymphocytes in the spleen decreases.
      When leptin levels are elevated, the innate and adaptive immune systems are stimulated. And
elevated leptin probably drives the overactivity of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells seen in autoimmune
disease. Leptin resistance further complicates matters because the desensitization of leptin receptors
is interpreted as leptin deficiency. This may be why leptin deficiency is associated with decreased
immunity and increased susceptibility to infection. Leptin resistance is also accompanied by
increased circulating leptin, so both immune suppression and immune activation may be occurring
simultaneously. This means that some cell types are suppressed while others are activated, leading to
a completely dysfunctional immune system and laying the foundation for the development of immune
and autoimmune diseases.
      Elevated leptin and leptin resistance have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several
autoimmune diseases, including Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, psoriasis, systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 diabetes,
and inflammatory bowel diseases. In fact, clinical trials involving acute starvation have shown that a
seven-day fast followed by eating causes a significant decrease in leptin, which results in
significantly less inflammation and immune activation in people with rheumatoid arthritis.
      When it comes to understanding how diet influences leptin regulation, the key seems to be
balance. Obesity, high-fat diets, high-carbohydrate diets, and hypercaloric diets in general all
increase leptin and cause leptin resistance. However, the other extreme produces the same results:
starvation, prolonged fasting, gross malnutrition, and severely calorie-restricted diets can all increase
leptin and leptin resistance. Some micronutrient deficiencies have been associated with higher leptin
levels, including zinc, vitamin A, vitamin C, and vitamin D (yet another link to nutrient-poor diets;
see here). There is a very close connection between insulin and leptin. Leptin signaling directly
impacts insulin release, and leptin resistance has been shown to increase insulin secretion and cause
insulin resistance. Furthermore, chronic hyperinsulinemia causes an increase in leptin. Therefore,
regulating blood-glucose levels is crucial for regulating both insulin and leptin (levels and
sensitivity). Because of this connection, it makes sense that low-glycemic-index and -load (which can
be achieved with low-, moderate-, and even high-carbohydrate intake) and low-carbohydrate
(irrespective of glycemic index or load) diets lower leptin levels (and also increase insulin
sensitivity) in obese people. Other dietary factors that impact leptin include alcohol consumption,
which increases leptin, and excessive fructose consumption, which causes leptin resistance.

Ghrelin. In many ways ghrelin is the counterpart, or opposing hormone, to leptin. While leptin signals
satiety, ghrelin signals hunger and is, in fact, considered the main hunger-stimulating hormone.
Ghrelin is released into the circulation (it circulates throughout the body via the blood) by the cells
that line the stomach when the stomach is empty and by specialized cells that line the small intestine
(although 60–70 percent is released by the cells lining the stomach). It can also be secreted by the
pancreas when blood sugar is low and by the liver when glycogen stores are low. Ghrelin travels to
the brain and activates NPY neurons in the hypothalamus to stimulate the sensation of hunger. Ghrelin
peaks right before a meal (when you’re feeling hungry) and drops quickly once you’ve eaten.
      Increased ghrelin stimulates the production of growth hormone, which is essential to stimulating
growth, cell reproduction, and cell regeneration but also has critical roles in metabolism, including
stimulating gluconeogenesis in the liver and stimulating lipolysis in adipocytes (release of free fatty
acids from stored triglycerides in fat-storage cells). However, ghrelin seems to be quite the
multitasker: it also contributes to regulation of gastrointestinal motility, gastric acid secretin, gastric
emptying, pancreatic function, glucose homeostasis (maintenance of normal blood-glucose levels),
cardiovascular function, blood pressure, immune function, cell proliferation and survival, the
reproductive system, bone metabolism, secretion of a wide variety of hormones, sleep, anxiety, and
even memory.
      Ghrelin may also play a role in the adaptation to fasting. During a fast, ghrelin levels continue to
rise, which may be essential for maintaining blood-glucose levels needed for survival during
prolonged nutrient restriction. This is achieved thanks to ghrelin’s influence on catecholamines,
cortisol (see here), glucagon, growth hormone, and insulin and its effects on insulin sensitivity.
      Regulation of ghrelin levels and ghrelin secretion appears to be a very complex process. There
is an interplay between ghrelin and other hunger hormones, including insulin, leptin, glucagon, and
glucagon-like peptide-1 (see here). In particular, there is a link between ghrelin and insulin. Very low
plasma-ghrelin levels are associated with elevated fasting-insulin levels and insulin resistance
(which may be the link between overeating and diabetes). In fact, increasing ghrelin suppresses
glucose-induced insulin release and causes hyperglycemia. The opposite is also true: reducing ghrelin
enhances insulin release and restores insulin sensitivity. To support normal insulin responses and
normal insulin sensitivity, ghrelin must be well regulated.
      While the cells that line the stomach are responsible for the majority of ghrelin secretion, ghrelin
is also produced in the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, hippocampus, brain cortex, adrenal glands,
intestine, pancreas, liver, lungs, placenta, fat tissue, and lymphoid organs, such as the thymus (see
here). Perhaps most important, ghrelin is secreted by cells of both the innate and the adaptive immune
systems (including monocytes, natural killer cells, B cells, and T cells), and receptors to ghrelin have
been found on monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells, and T cells. Ghrelin is associated
with powerful anti-inflammatory properties, in particular with substantial decreases in a wide range
of proinflammatory cytokines as well as other mediators of inflammation. This reduction in
proinflammatory cytokines decreases activation of and suppresses both inflammatory cells (including
neutrophils) and adaptive immune system cells, most notably, Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells. In animal
models of inflammation and autoimmune disease, the administration of ghrelin significantly reduces
Th1 and Th2 cells and increases regulatory T cells.
     Ghrelin also plays an important role in promoting lymphocyte development in the primary
lymphoid organs (the bone marrow and thymus). In fact, the age-associated changes in the thymus
gland (shrinkage and production of fewer T cells; see here) have been absolutely linked to decreased
ghrelin as we age and can even be reversed with ghrelin supplementation.




Are Coffee and Tea Proinflammatory or Anti-inflammatory?




Coffee is loaded with antioxidants and polyphenols, and a number of studies have linked moderate
coffee consumption with a range of health benefits, including the prevention of cancer, stroke,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, depression, antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, cirrhosis of the
liver, gout, gallstones, and Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. But the same antioxidants and
polyphenols in coffee are also found just as abundantly in fruits and vegetables, which is why eating
lots of plant matter has pretty much the same positive effects as coffee on health (and actually far
more).
      A large percentage of people find that coffee upsets their stomach or gives them heartburn. This
is because coffee stimulates the secretion of gastrin, the main gastric hormone. This causes excessive
secretion of gastric acid and speeds up gastric peristalsis. (Even decaf coffee does this.) Coffee also
stimulates release of the hormone cholecystokinin (see here), which stimulates release of bile from
the gallbladder and digestive enzymes from the pancreas. In a healthy individual who consumes low
(one or fewer small cups a day) to moderate (two or three small cups a day) amounts of coffee, this
release of bile from the gallbladder and bicarbonates from the pancreas is probably sufficient to
neutralize the highly acidic chyme (the contents of the stomach that empty into the small intestine).
However, in someone with compromised gallbladder function or who drinks excessive amounts of
coffee (more than three small cups a day), highly acidic chyme irritates and inflames the lining of the
intestines. Furthermore, when coffee is consumed on an empty stomach, the digestive enzymes
secreted into the small intestine by the pancreas in response to the very acidic chyme can cause
increased intestinal permeability (see here). This is mostly an argument to limit coffee consumption
and drink it only with a meal.
      Some of the health benefits of coffee are attributable to its caffeine content. (This is why
drinking tea, which is likewise loaded with antioxidants, polyphenols, and caffeine, is also
associated with good health.) Caffeine content is partly why decaf doesn’t have many of the
beneficial effects. And the decaffeination process tends to strip away not only much of coffee’s
caffeine but also many of its antioxidants and polyphenols (potentially leaving behind a few of the
more harmful substances). Basically, regular coffee contains some good and some bad, but most of
the good is stripped out of decaf. However, caffeine can also have rather negative effects (drat!), and
these are of concern to those with autoimmune disease.
      The most salient detrimental effect of caffeine (whether consumed in coffee, tea, chocolate, or
energy drinks) is probably the impact it has on cortisol, which is discussed in more detail in chapter
3. Caffeine raises cortisol levels by increasing the production of adrenocorticotropic hormone by the
pituitary gland. Excessive cortisol production can lead to a variety of health issues, including an
overactive immune system, disrupted sleep, impaired digestion, and depression. When you consume
caffeine, your cortisol level increases and can stay elevated for up to six hours. With daily
consumption, your body will adapt somewhat and not produce quite as much cortisol, but complete
tolerance to caffeine doesn’t happen. Cortisol will increase way more in response to stress (like
when that guy cuts you off in traffic) in someone who habitually consumes caffeine than in someone
who doesn’t. If you have difficulty managing stress, caffeine isn’t your friend.
      One key study showed that moderate coffee consumption in healthy individuals correlated with
increased inflammation in their blood: people who drank more than two hundred milliliters (about six
and a half ounces, or one large cup) of coffee every day (equivalent to 37.3 milligrams of caffeine)
had an increase in white blood cells and several key inflammatory cytokines. These increases in
markers of inflammation were persistent even after adjusting for other health and lifestyle factors
(such as age, sex, weight, exercise, and smoking). Furthermore, while coffee has been shown to
improve insulin sensitivity in diabetics, it also decreases insulin sensitivity in healthy adults. Most
important, even in diabetics, improved insulin sensitivity is not accompanied by a reduction in
inflammation.
      Again, this is an argument against excessive and habitual consumption of coffee. An occasional
cup of coffee (say one cup with your Sunday brunch each week) may or may not be problematic,
depending on how well regulated your cortisol levels are. However, it should also be noted that
instant coffee has been shown to cross-react strongly with gliadin (i.e., gluten) antibodies and should
therefore be completely avoided (see here).
      Like coffee, green and black tea provide a variety of health benefits, including having
antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, anti-inflammatory, and antimutagenic properties. Interestingly, green
and black tea seem to have different responses in models of disease than in models of healthy animals
and human cells. In healthy animals, green tea extracts are proinflammatory, resulting in greater
numbers of regulatory T cells but also natural killer cells and cytotoxic T cells. And, in naïve (not
activated) inflammatory cells isolated from blood samples, black tea caused proinflammatory
cytokine production. Conversely, green and black tea are implicated as good immune modulators in
models of autoimmune disease. For example, black tea significantly decreased inflammation in a
mouse model of colitis. Green tea was shown to inhibit Th17 cell production and increase anti-
inflammatory signals in a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis. A recent study showed that an extract
from green tea inhibits naïve T cells from maturing into both Th1 and Th17 cells while supporting the
development of regulatory T cells.
     Although green and black tea contain caffeine, they have been shown to lower induction of
cortisol in response to both acute stressors and intense exercise while improving relaxation and
recovery.
     Generally, caffeine should be limited if not completely avoided on the Paleo Approach, mainly
to support normalization of cortisol levels and rhythms. There may be some benefit to drinking green
and black tea in moderation, but definitive studies have not been performed.



      Just as ghrelin is considered the opposing hormone to leptin in terms of hunger signaling, the
same relationship holds true in terms of immune-system regulation. Ghrelin directly counteracts the
proinflammatory and immune-stimulatory effects of leptin, causing a decrease in leptin-stimulated
release of proinflammatory cytokines and both monocyte and Th1 cell activation. In fact, increased
leptin tells T cells to boost production of ghrelin, which may be an important way that the body tries
to control and regulate the immune system.
      Ghrelin also promotes intestinal cell proliferation and inhibits intestinal cell apoptosis during
inflammatory states and oxidative stress. Its regenerative capacity and beneficial properties in the
event of mucosal injury to the stomach imply that ghrelin regulation is very important for healing a
damaged and leaky gut.
      Both low ghrelin and high ghrelin have been associated with autoimmune disease. Even in the
case of high levels of ghrelin, administration of additional ghrelin in drug form is still being
investigated as a treatment for some autoimmune diseases. Administration of ghrelin is being studied
as a treatment in inflammatory bowel diseases and has shown benefits in a variety of animal models.
It has also been beneficial in animal models of multiple sclerosis by reducing activation of Th1 and
Th17 cells. Clearly, regulating ghrelin is important for managing autoimmune disease.
      Which dietary factors regulate ghrelin? First, it might be useful to define what regulated ghrelin
actually is. It seems to be important to both maximize ghrelin before a meal and minimize it after a
meal. Ghrelin levels rise when the stomach is empty and when energy is low (including blood
glucose, glycogen stores, and circulating triglycerides). This means that in order to properly increase
ghrelin, there must be sufficient time between meals. (Yes, it’s good to feel hungry; see here.) When
you eat, ghrelin secretion is inhibited by the consumption of carbohydrates, especially glucose and
dietary fiber, and protein. However, ghrelin is not inhibited by fructose, and excessive fructose
consumption has been linked to chronically elevated ghrelin (which may be why overconsumption of
fructose stimulates appetite). Ghrelin is less affected by dietary fats (more so by short-chain and
medium-chain fatty acids than by long-chain fatty acids, but still much less than by carbohydrates and
protein). There is also evidence that eating a high-protein, high-carbohydrate breakfast has big
benefits in terms of regulating ghrelin (by decreasing it substantially), but remember that blood sugar
regulation is also important.

Eating for Hunger-Hormone Regulation

Clearly, regulating blood glucose (and therefore insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity) is
paramount in regulating all the hunger hormones. It has been well documented in the scientific
literature that the key to controlling blood glucose is to eat micronutrient-dense foods and insoluble
fiber and avoid high-glycemic-index and -load foods. Insulin sensitivity has also been shown to
improve with greater intake of monounsaturated fats and insoluble fiber, low-glycemic-index diets,
and keeping both fat and protein intake modest (too little or too much may contribute to insulin
resistance).
     It’s also important to eat what most people would typically recognize as a “balanced meal”:
some protein, some fat, and some carbohydrates, including fiber. This translates well to eating quality
meats and fish, quality added fats, large portions of nonstarchy vegetables, and some starchy
vegetables and fruit. Recommendations for portion sizes and macronutrient ratios are discussed in
more detail on see here.
     There is also a strong connection between regulation of the immune-modulating hunger hormones
and several lifestyle factors, including exercise, sleep, circadian rhythm, and the timing and spacing
of meals. These are all discussed in more detail in chapter 3.

Gluten Again

I know that you’ve already sworn off gluten because of its ability to cause a leaky gut and contribute
to gut dysbiosis. But it’s important to emphasize that many of the dysfunctional changes in the immune
system observed in autoimmune disease may be caused simply by gluten in your diet.
     While equivalent studies in humans have not been performed, a series of studies performed in
mice provide evidence for an immune-stimulating effect of dietary gluten. This series of experiments
evaluated how two diets—one containing gluten and one with no gluten—affect the immune system in
healthy mice. When mice were fed a gluten-containing diet, there was a huge increase in cytokine
production by T cells toward proinflammatory signals, specifically those cytokines that are hallmarks
of activated Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells. And there was an increase in the number of Th17 cells
detected in gut-associated lymphoid tissue and pancreatic lymph nodes. To top it off, mice fed gluten-
containing diets had fewer regulatory T cells compared with mice fed a gluten-free diet, an effect that
was exaggerated in mice with type 1 diabetes. This may be why many people find immediate
alleviation of symptoms upon adopting a gluten-free diet.
You Made It!

Phew! Are you feeling a little overwhelmed? That was a whole lot of science and a whole lot of
foods, many of which may have been staples of your diet your entire life, and which you now
understand are not healthy for you. You may be feeling as if there’s nothing left that’s safe to eat. You
may be feeling angry that no one ever told you all this before. You may be feeling frustrated that some
of the foods that are major contributors to your autoimmune disease are reputed to be healthy, when
the complete opposite is true. I understand these feelings. It wasn’t that long ago that I used to add
vital wheat gluten to my baking to boost the protein content. When my oldest daughter was a toddler, I
used to bake frequently with soy flour because of all those good isoflavones—you know, the ones that
mimic estrogen! Even when I figured out that eating low-carb was good for weight loss, I was eating
tons of nutritionally poor foods, way too many omega-6 fatty acids, tons of gut-irritating sugar
substitutes, and ridiculous amounts of nightshade vegetables. I can’t tell you how often I have looked
back and wished that I had understood the importance of what I was eating with regard to my health
(beyond just wanting to lose weight) ten, fifteen, or even twenty years earlier.
      However, I’m a firm believer in focusing on the positive. I now possess powerful tools to
manage my autoimmune disease without drugs, and these tools are completely sustainable for the rest
of my life. And I have the tools to make sure that my daughters stay healthy despite the high likelihood
that they have inherited from me genes that predispose them to autoimmune diseases. And I have the
privilege of sharing these tools with you.

          “When diet is correct medicine is of no need. When diet is wrong medicine is of no use.
          ”
          —ANCIENT AYURVEDIC PROVERB

      So instead of feeling overwhelmed and feeling that you should go back and reread this chapter
with a highlighter, let’s celebrate that we made it through—you made it through reading it, and I made
it through writing it! After all, I did promise you a hefty chapter detailing the science behind how
foods impact the health of your gut and interact with your immune system. And I hope you now
understand why I think that explaining this science is so important. The next chapter deals with
lifestyle factors that are equally important in managing autoimmune disease. And then we get to talk
about all the wonderful, delicious, healthy, and healing foods that we do get to eat! We get to start
healing our bodies! We get to regain our health and embrace hope! That’s worth cracking open a
bottle of kombucha.
   Summary of Foods to Avoid on the Paleo Approach
While I firmly believe that it’s important to focus on what you can eat rather than what you
can’t, it’s also important to spell out exactly which foods should be avoided for those with
autoimmune disease. Don’t be discouraged by this list, because the rest of this book focuses on
all the delicious and wonderfully healthy foods you can eat. I promise you will not feel deprived!

                                          Foods to Avoid:
    Grains: Barley, corn, durum, fonio, Job’s tears, kamut, millet, oats, rice, rye, sorghum, spelt, teff,
triticale, wheat (all varieties, including einkorn and semolina), and wild rice.
    Gluten: Barley, rye, wheat, and foods derived from these ingredients. (See the table here for
hidden sources of gluten and commonly contaminated foods.)
    Pseudo-grains and grainlike substances: Amaranth, buckwheat, chia, and quinoa.
    Dairy: Butter, buttermilk, butter oil, cheese, cottage cheese, cream, milk, curds, dairy-protein
isolates, ghee, heavy cream, ice cream, kefir, sour cream, whey, whey-protein isolate, whipping
cream, and yogurt. (Cultured grass-fed ghee might be tolerated.)
    Legumes: Adzuki beans, black beans, black-eyed peas, butter beans, calico beans, cannellini
beans, chickpeas (aka garbanzo beans), fava beans (aka broad beans), Great Northern beans, green
beans, Italian beans, kidney beans, lentils, lima beans, mung beans, navy beans, pinto beans, peanuts,
peas, runner beans, split peas, and soybeans (including edamame, tofu, tempeh, other soy products,
and soy isolates, such as soy lecithin).
    Processed vegetable oils: Canola oil (rapeseed oil), corn oil, cottonseed oil, palm kernel oil,
peanut oil, safflower oil, sunflower oil, and soybean oil.
    Processed food chemicals and ingredients: Acrylamides, artificial food color, artificial and
natural flavors, autolyzed protein, brominated vegetable oil, emulsifiers (carrageenan, cellulose gum,
guar gum, lecithin, xanthan gum), hydrolyzed vegetable protein, monosodium glutamate, nitrates or
nitrites (naturally occurring are okay), olestra, phosphoric acid, propylene glycol, textured vegetable
protein, trans fats (partially hydrogenated vegetable oil, hydrogenated oil), yeast extract, and any
ingredient with a chemical name that you don’t recognize.
    Added sugars: Agave, agave nectar, barley malt, barley malt syrup, beet sugar, brown rice syrup,
brown sugar, cane crystals, cane juice, cane sugar, caramel, coconut sugar, corn sweetener, corn
syrup, corn syrup solids, crystalline fructose, date sugar, dehydrated cane juice, demerara sugar,
dextrin, dextrose, diastatic malt, evaporated cane juice, fructose, fruit juice, fruit juice concentrate,
galactose, glucose, glucose solids, golden syrup, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, invert sugar, inulin,
jaggery, lactose, malt syrup, maltodextrin, maltose, maple syrup, molasses, monk fruit (luo han guo),
muscovado sugar, palm sugar, panela, panocha, rapadura, raw cane sugar, raw sugar, refined sugar,
rice bran syrup, rice syrup, saccharose, sorghum syrup, sucanat, sucrose, syrup, treacle, turbinado
sugar, yacon syrup. (For a discussion of Paleo Approach–friendly treats, see here.)
    Sugar alcohols: Erythritol, mannitol, sorbitol, and xylitol. (Naturally occurring sugar alcohols
found in whole foods like fruit are OK.)
   Nonnutritive sweeteners: Acesulfame potassium, aspartame, neotame, saccharin, stevia, and
sucralose.
   Nuts and nut oils: Almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, chestnuts, hazelnuts, macadamia nuts, pecans,
pine nuts, pistachios, or walnuts, or any flours, butters, oils, or other products derived from these
nuts. (Coconut is an exception; see here.)
   Seeds and seed oils: Chia, flax, hemp seeds, poppy, pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower, and any
flours, butters, oils, and other products derived from them.
    Nightshades or spices derived from nightshades: Ashwagandha, bell peppers (aka sweet
peppers), cayenne peppers, cape gooseberries (ground cherries, not to be confused with regular
cherries, which are OK), eggplant, garden huckleberries (not to be confused with regular
huckleberries, which are OK), goji berries (aka wolfberries), hot peppers (chili peppers and chili-
based spices), naranjillas, paprika, pepinos, pimentos, potatoes (sweet potatoes are OK), tamarillos,
tomatillos, and tomatoes. (Note: Some curry powders have nightshade ingredients.)
   Spices derived from seeds (small amounts might be tolerated): Anise, annatto, black caraway
(Russian caraway, black cumin), celery seed, coriander, cumin, dill, fennel, fenugreek, mustard, and
nutmeg. (For more information on spices, see here.)
   Eggs: Although egg yolks might be tolerated.
   Alcohol: Although an occasional drink after remission might be tolerated.
   Coffee: Although an occasional cup might be tolerated.
   High-glycemic-load foods

                           Foods to Consume in Moderation
     Green and black tea
     Fructose: Aim for between ten and twenty grams of fructose per day.
     Salt: Use pink or gray salt because it is rich in trace minerals.
     Moderate-glycemic-load vegetables and fruits
Chapter 2 Review



   Nutrient-poor diets are one of the biggest risk factors for autoimmune disease. Autoimmune
   diseases have been linked to dietary insufficiencies of a staggering number of vitamins and
   minerals, as well as to insufficiencies in antioxidants, fiber, and essential fatty acids.




   The immune system requires micronutrients (water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins, minerals,
   and antioxidants), plus essential fatty acids and amino acids, to function normally.




   Eating fat is good for you. The healthiest fats are saturated fats and monounsaturated fats, and it
   is essential that you consume a balanced ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
   (ideally between 1:1 and 4:1). Eating fats is necessary for absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.
   Too much omega-6 fatty acids cause inflammation and gut dysbiosis. Increasing omega-3 fatty
   acid intake helps reduce inflammation, modulate the immune system, and correct gut dysbiosis.
   Moderate consumption of monounsaturated fats and saturated fats is healthy.




   Eating a nutrient-dense diet based on quality meats, seafood, vegetables, and fruits is the
   healthiest and most effective way to ensure that your body is getting all the nutrients it needs for
   optimal health.




   Environmental estrogens should be avoided. They are found in foods (flaxseed, soy, whole
   grains, corn, and meat and eggs from animals treated with hormones), food-storage items (plastic
   containers), pesticides, and many household and beauty products. The use of oral contraceptives
   should be critically evaluated (see chapter 1).
A variety of proteins in grains—including prolamins, such as gluten, and agglutinins, such as
wheat germ agglutinin—cause increased intestinal permeability, feed bacterial overgrowth in the
gut, and stimulate the immune system.




Digestive-enzyme inhibitors in grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, and dairy products cause increased
intestinal permeability, feed bacterial overgrowth in the gut, and cause inflammation.




High dietary intake of phytates or phytic acid—found in grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds—
causes increased intestinal permeability.




Types of saponins called glycoalkaloids, found in vegetables of the nightshade family, cause
increased intestinal permeability and significantly stimulate the immune system. Other saponins
found in legumes may also be problematic.




Alcohol consumption causes increased intestinal permeability, damages the gut, feeds bacterial
overgrowth in the gut, and stimulates inflammation.




Proteins found in egg whites act as carrier molecules for bacterial proteins to cross the gut
barrier, which then stimulate the immune system.




Antinutrients are compounds that prevent the absorption or utilization of nutrients in food.
High-carbohydrate diets cause insulin resistance, leptin resistance, and inflammation.




Following a low-carbohydrate diet is not essential, but avoiding a high-carbohydrate diet is.




Regulating blood-glucose levels and insulin release by eating low- to moderate-glycemic-load
foods is important. This approach helps regulate insulin and insulin sensitivity as well as leptin
and leptin sensitivity.




Fructose causes insulin resistance, leptin resistance, and inflammation and may also cause
increased intestinal permeability and damage to the liver. Fructose also doesn’t suppress ghrelin
levels after eating, leading to immune dysregulation and increased hunger.




Dietary fructose should be maintained in the ten- to twenty-gram-per-day range.




All sugar substitutes have negative health effects.




Hunger hormones are intricately linked to the immune system. Eating large, balanced meals that
contain protein, fat, and low- to moderate-glycemic-load vegetables and fruits and avoiding
snacking (see chapter 3) is the best way to properly regulate hunger hormones.
Dietary fiber, especially insoluble fiber, from whole-food sources such as vegetables helps
regulate ghrelin levels and helps correct gut dysbiosis.
Chapter 3
Lifestyle Factors That Contribute to Autoimmune Disease


          “Healing is a matter of time, but it is sometimes also a matter of opportunity. ”
          —HIPPOCRATES


It’s not just about food. Although this book focuses heavily on diet and nutrition, lifestyle factors are
just as crucial when it comes to healing the body, reducing inflammation, and keeping the immune
system in tiptop shape.

In many ways, advocating lifestyle changes as a way to manage autoimmune disease is an easy sell.
Most people get that they would be healthier if they slept more or better, if they got more or better
exercise, and if they had less stress. The idea of making lifestyle changes is easy to understand, but
actually doing it is another story. Too often lifestyle changes are far more challenging than dietary
changes, even if you’ve done a 180 foodwise. Excuses just seem to abound: “I can’t go to bed earlier
because I have too much to do.” “I would love to have more time for walks outside, but I have a
deadline.” “Sun exposure is great, but it’s just too cold here in the winter.” “Well, I just love running
marathons, and I’m sure that keeps me healthy, so I can’t imagine giving that up!” “Meditate? When on
earth am I supposed to find time to meditate?!”

Let me be clear: Dietary changes aren’t effective in isolation. If you don’t address lifestyle factors as
well, it won’t matter how ideal your food choices are.

That’s not to say that there aren’t times when you feel like you can’t move forward: “I try to get more
sleep, but I wake up in the middle of the night and just can’t fall back to sleep.” “I’m in too much pain
and too restricted by my disease to exercise.” “I have a baby who wakes me up several times at
night.” “I live in the Arctic, where it’s dark for six months straight and your nose freezes off in five
seconds.” We will talk about these sorts of challenges in chapter 6.

Just as in chapter 2, this chapter is going to get science-y: we’ll delve into how stress, circadian
rhythms, sleep, and exercise affect hormone regulation, gut health, and the immune system. I wouldn’t
go there if I didn’t feel strongly that, as I’ve said before, once you understand the nuts and bolts you’ll
understand just how crucial it is to manage stress, get enough sleep, get mild to moderate activity, and
protect your circadian rhythms. Once again, you will notice that many of these factors are
interconnected. And many are also interconnected with nutrition.
Stress Management
(or Lack Thereof)

I cannot stress enough (pardon the pun) the negative impact that chronic stress has on all disease,
from increasing susceptibility to the common cold to being a major contributor to stimulating the
immune system in autoimmune disease.
       If you do not manage stress, it will completely undermine all the other positive changes you
make.
       The body is well equipped to deal with intensely stressful situations of short duration.
Historically, these situations would include something like being chased by a lion or slipping off the
edge of a cliff. During these events, the fight-or-flight response is activated, and cortisol and
adrenaline work together to ensure survival. At the end of the event, you are either dead (because you
fell from the cliff onto craggy rocks four hundred feet below) or alive and safe (because you grabbed
onto a branch as you slipped off the cliff and pulled yourself back up to safety). In either case, there is
no need for the body to continue producing adrenaline and excess cortisol. Levels return to normal
(unless you’re dead, of course), and you go on your merry way.
       What exactly is chronic stress? In modern society, we are endlessly exposed to low-grade
stress: from the alarm clock buzzing before we’re ready to get out of bed, to rushing to get out the
door on time, to traffic, to that deadline at work, to the coffee room at work being out of our favorite
flavored creamer—all small stressors that build up throughout the day, week, and years. There are
bills and home repairs, your mother-in-law, the economy, angry neighbors, kids getting into trouble at
school, health issues, being late for meetings, school exams, arguments, paying taxes, photocopiers
jamming, computers crashing, and spilling wine on a favorite shirt. There are small things that you
may not realize can contribute to chronic stress, like having bright lights on in your home after the sun
goes down, skipping breakfast, drinking too much coffee or energy drinks, going to bed too late on a
regular basis, or watching a scary movie before bed. Working out too intensely and not allowing for
enough rest between workouts can also be a chronic stressor. There are obviously bigger stressors in
life, too: divorce, death of a loved one, moving, injury, severe illness, violence, and war. For most of
us, stress is unrelenting. And our bodies are not designed for it.




     The master stress hormone is cortisol. Cortisol (also known as hydrocortisone) is a
glucocorticoid—a class of steroid hormones. It is synthesized from cholesterol by the adrenal gland
and is involved in diverse essential functions in the human body. While best known for its
contribution to the fight-or-flight reflex, cortisol is also an important regulator of metabolism,
inflammation, and circadian rhythms.
      Cortisol secretion is regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis (the HPA or
HPAC axis, also called the limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, or LHPA axis). The HPA
axis describes the complex communication between:
                      The hypothalamus: The part of the brain located just above the brain stem and
                       responsible for a variety of activities of the autonomic nervous system, such as
                       regulating body temperature, hunger, thirst, fatigue, sleep, and circadian rhythms
                      The pituitary gland: A pea-shaped gland located below the hypothalamus that
                       secretes a variety of important hormones, such as thyroid-stimulating hormone,
                       human growth hormone, and adrenocorticotropic hormone
                      The adrenal glands: Small, conical organs on top of the kidneys that secrete a
                       variety of hormones, such as cortisol, epinephrine (also known as adrenaline),
                       norepinephrine, and androgens (see here)
      There is an intricate interconnectedness among these three components of the axis, which, while
only partly understood, is a topic of intense study.
      In a fight-or-flight situation, the hypothalamus receives signals from the hippocampus, the area of
the brain that consolidates information and thus perceives danger. The hypothalamus then releases
certain neurohormones (often called hypothalamic-releasing hormones), such as corticotropin-
releasing hormone (CRH, also called corticotropin-releasing factor). CRH signals the anterior
pituitary gland to release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and endorphins (opioids produced by
the body that also function as neurotransmitters). ACTH circulates in the blood and reaches the
adrenal cortex (part of the adrenal gland), which stimulates the release of several glucocorticoids,
including cortisol (also corticosterone, aldosterone, and deoxycorticosterone) and the release of
catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine). Cortisol then feeds back to the pituitary,
hypothalamus, and hippocampus to restrain the system (negative feedback). A big part in the fight-or-
flight stress response is played by cortisol (which is the focus here because of its effect on the
immune system), but endorphins and epinephrine have starring roles as well.
     As mentioned earlier, cortisol has many functions. As part of the fight-or-flight reflex, its
primary action is to redirect fuel to the organs that need it most (basically, the brain and muscles for
enhanced decision-making, reflexes, and speed). Cortisol does this by stimulating gluconeogenesis,
the production of glucose from fatty acids and amino acids in the liver. Under normal conditions, this
rapid rise in glucose would cause increased insulin secretion, which would shuttle the glucose into
storage. However, cortisol also counteracts insulin, creating a state of hyperglycemia (high blood
sugar). Cortisol takes over control of blood-glucose concentration by simultaneously stimulating
glycogen synthesis in the liver and glycogenolysis, the breaking down of glycogen to glucose (and
glucose-1-phosphate) in the liver and muscles (this is achieved by increasing the activity of the
hormone glucagon, which is basically the opposite of insulin; see here). The increased glucose
provides quick fuel for the body. By interacting with different receptors in different tissues, cortisol
is also able to control which tissues can utilize this glucose and which tissues are low priority.
Cortisol increases circulating ketones (which can be used as energy by the brain) by stimulating
lipolysis (the breakdown of triglycerides into free fatty acids). Cortisol also raises the level of free
amino acids in the blood, probably in preparation for healing damaged tissues.
     Cortisol binds to glucocorticoid receptors embedded in the outer cell membranes of a wide
variety of cell types. Depending on the cell type and the exact glucocorticoid-receptor type, the
different effects of cortisol are achieved.
     Cortisol also shuts down nonessential processes to reserve resources for immediate survival
needs. This means that increased cortisol suppresses the digestive system, the reproductive system,
growth, the immune system, collagen formation, amino acid uptake by muscle, and protein synthesis,
and it even decreases bone formation. Cortisol release also communicates with regions of the brain
that control mood, motivation, and fear. In the context of surviving immediate danger, this has a
negligible effect on overall health, but in the context of chronic stress, these “other” effects of cortisol
become a very big problem.
     Cortisol has essential roles in the body independent of the fight-or-flight response, many of
which are still poorly understood. The best-known functions of cortisol include regulating blood
pressure, cardiovascular function, carbohydrate metabolism, and the immune system. During fasting,
when blood glucose has been depleted, cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis, thereby ensuring a steady
supply of glucose for the body. Cortisol regulates sodium and potassium levels in cells, which helps
control the body’s pH. Cortisol also regulates circadian rhythms.
     Cortisol has profound effects on the immune system and is required for normal wound healing
and for fighting infection. Studies have shown that acute (short-duration and intense) stressors (like
running away from a lion) induce a redistribution of immune cells in the body, resulting in enhanced
immune function in organs like the skin. White blood cells (such as neutrophils and monocytes) are
released from bone marrow and travel to the skin during acute stress, most likely in preparation for
wound healing. Cortisol released acutely in the fight-or-flight response also affects both maturation
and trafficking (that is, where they’re sent) of immune cells, including dendritic cells, macrophages,
and lymphocytes. In this situation, cortisol enhances both the innate and adaptive immune systems.
     In a healthy individual without chronic stress, cortisol levels fluctuate throughout the day in a
predictable pattern related to normal circadian rhythms. This is important because low cortisol
encourages certain functions and higher cortisol encourages others. In a healthy individual with well-
managed stress, cortisol is at its lowest in the wee hours of the morning, increases significantly in the
hour or two before waking, and is highest shortly after waking. Cortisol normally decreases slowly
throughout the day. This diurnal cycle (or circadian rhythm, discussed in more detail shortly) is
important for maintaining optimal bodily function. The low cortisol level a few hours before waking
is important for memory consolidation during sleep (the conversion of short-term memories to long-
term memories, accomplished through actions on the hippocampus). The higher levels throughout the
day help regulate energy and are required for normal autonomic functions (such as heart rate,
digestion, respiratory rate, salivation, perspiration, pupillary dilation, urination, and sexual arousal),
which are regulated by cortisol’s control of adrenoreceptor synthesis and sensitivity.




     Chronic stress is known to result in dysregulation of cortisol. Generally, cortisol levels can be
dysregulated in two ways: They can be chronically elevated, following a pattern similar to normal, or
they can ebb and flow throughout the day, following a very different pattern (but with levels still
higher than normal overall). This latter pattern is more common. Cortisol may start off quite low in
the morning—your body probably isn’t feeling ready to get up—but it may spike after a couple of
cups of coffee (your cortisol being low when you wake up makes you feel like you need a morning
pick-me-up). Cortisol then may dip in the early to midafternoon (when your energy is sagging and you
crave a sugary snack or cappuccino), then increase before bed, when you get your second wind and
decide to stay up late watching television. In both cases, more cortisol is being released than normal,
and this results in glucocorticoid-receptor resistance. In a situation completely analogous to insulin
resistance, the chronic inundation of cortisol causes various cells to decrease the number of receptors
to cortisol that they have in their cell membrane (or to inhibit the ability of those receptors to bind to
cortisol). This results in the body being less receptive to cortisol, which, as you can imagine, is a big
problem. Other environmental factors can decrease glucocorticoid receptors as well, including
chronic inflammation, some infections, and glucocorticoid medications (like prednisone).
     Not surprisingly, chronically elevated cortisol and cortisol resistance cause a variety of
deleterious effects. When cortisol is elevated for extended periods, proteolysis (breaking down of
protein to provide amino acids for elsewhere in the body) occurs in muscle tissues, which results in
muscle wasting. Insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes, obesity, and metabolic
syndrome, occurs as a direct result (see here). Depression and alterations in memory are common.
Fatty acid uptake by intra-abdominal adipocytes is stimulated, leading to the characteristic excess
abdominal fat that goes with cortisol resistance and chronic stress. Perhaps most critically for those
with autoimmune disease, chronically elevated cortisol and cortisol resistance contribute to a leaky
gut and hinder resolution of both inflammation and immune system stimulation.




     It’s All Interconnected
How your body responds to chronic stress is, at least in part, affected by diet. Studies have shown
that a deficiency in omega-3 fatty acids exaggerates stress responses. The converse is also true:
supplementation with fish oil reduces cortisol secretion in response to stress. What this information
suggests is that eating a nutrient-rich diet will improve your ability to handle sudden stressful
situations and your overall success at managing chronic stress.
      Of course, stress causes a leaky gut and hinders digestion. Sluggish digestion causes gut
dysbiosis and malabsorption of nutrients. Improving your diet isn’t going to be enough by itself—you
will need to make changes in your lifestyle to reduce stress. But improving your diet will help you
manage your stress, and managing your stress will help you reap more benefits from improvements in
your diet.




Chronic Stress Leads to a Dysfunctional Immune System. The effects of chronically elevated
cortisol (caused by physical or psychological stress or pharmaceuticals) and cortisol resistance have
been intensely studied. There is a spectrum of responses by the immune system to a high-cortisol
environment, probably reflecting different effects at different cortisol levels and in different cytokine
environments and in the context of different levels of glucocorticoid-receptor inhibition. The waters
are murky in terms of the details, but what is universally accepted is that chronic stress causes
immune system dysfunction.
     Cortisol alters cytokine secretion, increasing levels of some cytokines while decreasing others.
Cortisol influences T cell populations by suppressing some T cell subsets while stimulating
proliferation and activation of others. Cortisol even prompts a shift in cytokine receptors in
inflammatory cells. Some studies show a shift to Th1 dominance because of cortisol, others a shift to
Th2 dominance, still others a huge increase in regulatory T cell activity. (These studies do not
differentiate between regulatory T cells and Th3 cells). Some studies show a significant increase in
inflammation. The exact response of the immune system to chronic stress seems to depend on other
physiologic factors, such as hormones, cytokines, and neurotransmitters, as well as the state of
activation of the immune system (not activated, innate immunity activated, or adaptive immunity
activated). Even genes may play a role in how the immune system responds to chronic stress. The
immune system is complex and only just beginning to be understood, but the bottom line is that
chronic stress greatly diminishes its effectiveness. Chronic stress has been unequivocally shown to
increase susceptibility to a variety of conditions, including autoimmune disease, cardiovascular
disease, metabolic syndrome, osteoporosis, depression, infection, and cancer.
     Chronic stress also affects hunger hormones, which themselves are immune modulators.
However, the effects of chronic stress extend to food preferences. Chronically stressed mice, for
example, select high-fat diets over high-protein and high-carbohydrate diets and eat way more than
normal. Interestingly, this desire for a high-fat diet may help protect against anxiety and depression
(while unfortunately also stimulating weight gain). Appetite stimulation appears to be a result of
decreased leptin levels and increased ghrelin, especially in the evening. Cortisol may also influence
the reward value of food through interactions of leptin and insulin with neurotransmitters such as
neuropeptide Y (see here) and dopamine, leading to more cravings for calorie-dense and highly
palatable foods.

Increased Cortisol Causes a Leaky Gut. One of the biggest impacts chronic stress has on those
with autoimmune disease may be cortisol’s direct action on the enterocyte tight junctions (see here). It
is well understood that cortisol opens up the tight junctions and increases permeability of the gut
barrier (although the molecular details of this action are still being investigated). Given that a leaky
gut is now considered a necessary factor in the development of autoimmune disease, the relationship
between stress and a leaky gut cannot be overemphasized.
      How can you tell if you have chronic stress that may be leading to cortisol dysregulation or
cortisol resistance? Well, if you have an autoimmune disease, it’s pretty safe to say that your cortisol
levels and sensitivity are not normal. Although there are no tests available for glucocorticoid-
receptor resistance, which is the more accurate measure of cortisol problems, your health care
provider can test your cortisol levels throughout the day.
  What Happens When You Take Glucocorticoid Drugs to
Manage Your Autoimmune Disease?




Many physicians prescribe corticosteroids (oral, injected, topical, inhaled, or intranasal, depending
on your symptoms) to treat the symptoms of autoimmune disease. The need for steroid drugs really
arises from the fact that the body is cortisol-resistant and that the immune system is in overdrive.
Steroids work by binding to glucocorticoid receptors in immune cells, signaling the resolution of
inflammation and immunity. However, they also flood the body with glucocorticoids, typically with
no heed to the need for fluctuations in levels throughout the day, and further increase glucocorticoid-
receptor resistance. This is why symptoms often return (sometimes with a vengeance) after a course
of steroids is completed. Steroids also foster a leaky gut and hinder the normal healing process. How
to wean off steroid medications is discussed here.



      The best gauge of whether dysregulated cortisol is affecting your health is how you feel. Do you
feel stressed? Anxious? Depressed? Do you have a temper or feel like everything is just too much
sometimes? Do you handle your life well if you stick with routine, but the wheels fall off the wagon
as soon as something unplanned occurs? Do you have sugar cravings? Do you feel the need for coffee
or energy shots to get you through the day? Do you have trouble falling asleep or staying asleep? Is it
hard to get out of bed in the morning? Do you have to pee in the middle of the night? Do your moods
feel blunted or exaggerated? Do you get headaches? Do you have unresolved inflammation? Do you
catch every cold going around? Does it seem to take forever to get over the mildest infection or heal
from a minor scrape? These are all good indicators of cortisol issues. Another hallmark is a tendency
to put on weight in the abdomen.
      Cortisol provides an important negative-feedback signal in the HPA axis by directly inhibiting
secretion of CRH, which then decreases secretion of ACTH. This normal feedback system becomes
dysregulated in response to chronic stress. An impaired HPA axis (the responsiveness of the HPA
axis is hindered) and cortisol resistance are known risk factors for autoimmune disease and have
been linked to rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, multiple sclerosis, chronic
fatigue syndrome, and immune-related conditions such as asthma, eczema, and fibromyalgia. It’s also
interesting to note that a fairly extensive amount of research has revealed the connection between
chronic stress, HPA-axis impairment, and mood disorders such as depression, anxiety, and post-
traumatic stress disorder.
      And while cortisol resistance causes increased inflammation and susceptibility to infection, the
converse is also true: cortisol resistance can be caused by inflammation and infection. If you have an
autoimmune disease, managing stress is critical. It’s probably not going to be easy, and it’s going to
require constant vigilance. (Strategies for dealing with this aspect of managing autoimmune disease
are discussed in detail in chapter 6.) You can be doing everything else right, but when a stressful
situation arises (or life just gets away from you), your autoimmune disease can flare for no other
reason than that your cortisol levels got too high and your immune cells became cortisol-resistant.




Testimonial by Angie Alt




     “ I have had fantastic physical improvements since beginning the Paleo Approach, but for me
the ground I gained mentally and emotionally has been astounding. I had crippling anxiety issues
before adopting the Paleo Approach. Prior to my celiac diagnosis, I was told I had PTSD and even
considered a stay in a psychiatric facility. I was constantly advised to take antidepressants and
increasingly strong anti-anxiety medications. I refused most of these prescriptions, but was white-
knuckling it through my life.
      I had to withdraw from college due to how debilitated I had become. I could not read
coursework; I could not write effectively or participate in class discussion. Basically, I could not
concentrate or process information well. I was in a constant brain fog; I had trouble choosing the
correct words when speaking and often stuttered.
      Within three days of starting the Paleo Approach and dropping birth control pills, it was all
gone. I have not required any anxiety medication in over a year. I stopped seeing a psychologist
and a psychiatrist as my mental state rapidly normalized. I am emotionally much more stable, and
my family is very relieved to see a happy mom instead of an angry, depressed, sobbing mom. I
work full-time handling financial matters, blog several times a week, write monthly for
www.ThePaleoMom.com, and study the Paleo Approach and the Paleo diet endlessly. I can handle
all that mental work with ease again.
      When measuring your success, don’t discount the somewhat less “defined” areas, like mental
and emotional well-being. They are powerful indicators of health. Are you happier than you were
a month ago? If so, then the Paleo Approach is working. ”
Angie Alt blogs at
Alt-Ternative Universe
(Alt-ternativeUniverse.blogspot.com).




     The Importance of Touch and Connection




Research has shown that physical connection—whether hugging a family member, enjoying sexual
relations with your partner, cuddling with a pet, or receiving therapeutic touch or massage—reduces
cortisol. A variety of studies have shown that therapeutic touch, when added to hospital care,
improves patient outcomes in a variety of ways.
      Touch, love, and positive social interactions increase the hormone oxytocin, what is sometimes
referred to as the “love hormone.” Oxytocin is produced by specialized neurons in the thalamus and
then stored and released by the posterior pituitary gland. Upon release, oxytocin is associated with
feelings of contentment and calm, reductions in anxiety, and increases in human bonding and trust. It
also inhibits fear and nervousness. You may recognize oxytocin as the hormone released during
childbirth and breastfeeding. Like all the hormones discussed in The Paleo Approach, it has many
roles in the body.
      Importantly, increased oxytocin levels lead to a decrease in activity in the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis; see here) and enhanced immune function. Essentially, increasing
oxytocin protects against stress. In fact, positive social interaction has been shown to have a direct
impact on wound healing, attributable to increased levels of oxytocin. Oxytocin also modulates
inflammation by decreasing some proinflammatory cytokines. Whether the effects of oxytocin are
completely owing to direct interactions with the immune system or to effects on cortisol and the HPA
axis remains unknown. Either way, the feeling of connection is important for general health and well-
being.
      Social connection plays another significant role in managing autoimmune disease. Your friends,
your family, your colleagues, and even your neighbors are all important members of your support
network. Having a strong social network of people you can ask and count on for help is vital to
making the lifestyle changes you need to make to heal your body. Whether they are immediate or
extended family, friends, members of your house of worship or other spiritual organization, members
of your gym, pals from your knitting group, parents of kids in your child’s class, neighbors, or
colleagues at work, these people can support you in your effort to simplify your life and prioritize
sleep, activity, and stress management. They can also commiserate with you, give you a shoulder to
cry or lean on, and provide moral and emotional support, even when they can’t provide tangible
support, like babysitting your kids so you can take a nap. Just knowing that you have people who are
there for you, just feeling connected to even a small handful of people whom you trust and love, can
make a huge difference in your ability to cope with, and heal from, autoimmune disease.




A variety of factors besides psychological stress can impact cortisol and also need to be
addressed, including:


     alcohol consumption (see here)
     caffeine consumption (see here)
     inadequate sleep (see here)
     intense or prolonged physical exercise (see here)
     low estrogen levels (e.g., postmenopause)
     malnutrition
     melatonin supplementation (see here)
     oral contraceptive use (see here)
     obesity
     severe calorie restriction (including intermittent fasting; see here and here)
Why Circadian Rhythms Matter

Your body knows what time it is. OK, maybe it doesn’t know that it’s 7:14 a.m., but it does know that
it’s time to get up and have breakfast. This is part of what is called circadian rhythm. More
technically, circadian rhythm, also sometimes termed biorhythm, refers to the fact that a huge array
of biological processes and functions across all forms of life cycle according to a twenty-four-hour
clock. Circadian rhythm allows your body to assign functions based on the time of day (and whether
or not you are awake or asleep), like prioritizing tissue repair and memory consolidation while you
are sleeping and prioritizing the search for food, digestion, metabolism, movement, and thought while
you are awake.
      The master control for circadian rhythms is in the hypothalamus. A group of genes generally
referred to as the core clock genes create a rhythm in the electrical and metabolic activity of specific
neurons in the hypothalamus. This creates circadian clock signals that are relayed throughout the body
via the endocrine (hormone) system by increasing and decreasing a variety of hormones according to
the time of day. These timekeeping signals communicate to clock genes in other tissues to synchronize
your body’s circadian clock. Think of your brain as Greenwich Mean Time and the endocrine signals
as the time displayed on a twenty-four-hour news channel. Every once in a while, it’s nice to check
the time on your watch against the time on the TV (or the computer or the clock at work), which is
what the tissues in your body do in response to changing hormone levels. It’s helpful if everybody is
on the same clock.




The region of the hypothalamus responsible for circadian rhythms is about the size of a grain of
rice and is called the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the anterior hypothalamus.




One of the clock genes is literally named the CLOCK gene.




Anything that influences your circadian clock is called a zeitgeber, which comes from the German
zeit, meaning “time,” plus geber, meaning “giver.” The most important zeitgeber is the light-dark
cycle, but almost anything you do at a particular time of day (such as eat or exercise) is one.

     The most important external factor influencing your body’s circadian clock is the light-dark
cycle—that your body detects light during the day and darkness at night predictably and regularly.
However, several factors are known to affect the circadian clock, including exposure to bright lights,
meal timing and fasting, physical exercise, sleep schedule (such as inadequate sleep, which will be
discussed in the next section, but also abnormal sleep rhythms, as occurs in shift workers), and stress.
      While a huge variety of hormones cycle as part of the body’s circadian rhythms, two that are
particularly important both in communicating the timekeeping signals of the body’s circadian clock
and as markers of the health of the body’s circadian rhythms are melatonin and cortisol.
      Melatonin is a hormone produced by the pineal gland—a small gland located in the center of the
brain—in response to signals from the hypothalamus. Melatonin secretion starts to increase about two
hours before bedtime (provided the lighting is dim), producing drowsiness and a lowered body
temperature in preparation for sleep. Typically, melatonin levels peak in the early hours of the
morning and decrease to very low levels after waking. Melatonin production is permitted by darkness
and inhibited by light. Under normal conditions, the rhythm of melatonin production exactly reflects
the length of the day and night and varies by time of year (which is why it’s natural to sleep more in
the winter and less in the summer). However, melatonin production is sensitive to light exposure and
can be suppressed even by ordinary indoor light. Because of indoor lighting, most of us now
experience a summerlike circadian clock year-round.




       Reprinted from W. de Jager and G. T. Rijkers, “Solid-phase and Bead- Based Cytokine Immunoassay: A Comparison,”Methods
38, no. 4 (2006): 294-303. Copyright © 2006 with permission from Elsevier.
       Reprinted with permission from T. Bollinger et al., “Sleep, Immunity, and Circadian Clocks: A Mechanistic Model,”Gerontology
56 (2010): 574-580. Copyright © 2010 Karger Publishers, Basel, Switzerland.



     While melatonin is produced by the pineal gland as a timekeeping signal of the body’s circadian
clock, it is produced in other tissues as well, notably in the gastrointestinal tract and by the cells of
the immune system. Thus it appears that melatonin also plays a role in digestion and as an immune
modulator.
     Many aspects of the immune system also follow circadian rhythms. The numbers of many
different immune cells vary by time of day, including monocytes, dendritic cells, natural killer cells,
B cells, helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells, and regulatory T cells. Regulatory T-cell activity also
increases during sleep (as will be discussed in the next section). Also, cytokine secretion by these
cell types follows a circadian rhythm. In fact, several immune cells have clock genes, including
neutrophils, natural killer cells, and macrophages. The rhythmic production of cortisol is most likely
a key controller of the immune system’s circadian rhythms, but melatonin has a hand in that as well.
     Some studies have demonstrated that melatonin enhances the immune system, while others have
demonstrated that it suppresses it. Melatonin’s complex role as a stimulator of some aspects of the
immune system and as an inhibitor of others supports the contention that the cycle of melatonin
secretion is important for proper immune function.
     Melatonin influences cells of the adaptive immune system through interactions with melatonin
receptors. Receptors for melatonin are predominantly found in the cell membranes of CD4+ T cells,
but also on CD8+ T cells and B cells. Melatonin appears to promote survival and proliferation of T
cells and B cells. For example, melatonin supplementation promotes survival of B cells in the bone
marrow and causes the thymus gland and the spleen to become enlarged (in animal models).
Importantly, melatonin—not just the melatonin secreted by the pineal gland—controls the
proliferation of activated lymphocytes. Lymphocytes themselves produce melatonin, which is related
to the production of specific cytokines that stimulate T-cell proliferation (probably a signal to
neighboring T cells to divide). However, there is conflicting information regarding the effects of
melatonin on naïve T-cell differentiation (maturation). Most studies show that melatonin
supplementation supports the development of Th1 cells, but other studies show that Th1 cell activity
may be suppressed through stimulation of Th2 cells. This implies a role for melatonin in determining
exactly how the immune system responds to a specific pathogen.
      The effects of melatonin on the innate immune system are even more complex. Melatonin reduces
recruitment of neutrophils out of the blood and into the tissues at the site of inflammation. It also
suppresses the generation of enzymes that produce reactive oxygen species (see here). In addition,
melatonin itself is a very powerful broad-spectrum antioxidant. In fact, melatonin can prevent the
damage to DNA caused by some carcinogens, thereby preventing cancer. On the other hand, melatonin
increases cytokine production by white blood cells. It also increases natural-killer-cell activity and
enhances the production of natural killer cells and monocytes in the bone marrow. Melatonin also
increases activity of phagocytic “eater” cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and enhances
antigen presentation by cells of the innate immune system (see here).
      Melatonin’s complex role in the immune system is reflected in experiments evaluating the use of
melatonin supplementation in animal models of autoimmune disease. For example, melatonin
supplementation aggravates multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis but improves ulcerative colitis
(in animals). Clinical studies have generally shown no benefit of melatonin supplementation in people
with autoimmune disease (with some indications that melatonin supplementation may increase disease
symptoms in some people). When it comes to human health, it appears to be far more important to
support normal melatonin production and cycles. For example, those who suffer from psoriasis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis experience both lower peaks of melatonin in the night and
higher levels in the late morning and midday than healthy individuals. In some cases, daytime
melatonin production can be even higher than nighttime production. And, at least in multiple sclerosis,
abnormal melatonin rhythm is associated with disease flares.
      As already mentioned, melatonin production can be suppressed by ordinary indoor light. This is
a problem if you keep your house fully lit after the sun goes down because those lights literally
prevent your body from getting ready for sleep. However, melatonin suppression from artificial lights
is also dependent on prior light exposure: the more light you are exposed to earlier in the day, the less
melatonin is suppressed. This means that if you spend quality time outside in the sun during the day,
having lights on in your home in the evening will have less of an effect on melatonin secretion. It is
principally blue light that suppresses melatonin, and the degree of suppression is proportional to the
intensity of the light and the length of exposure. Until the advent of electricity and the incandescent
lightbulb, we used fire, which gives off predominantly yellow light, to provide light in the evening.
Incandescent lightbulbs produce relatively little blue light, which causes two problems. First,
exposure to blue light during the day, if you spend most of your time indoors, is not intense enough.
Second, exposure to blue light in the evening is too intense. The resulting effect on melatonin looks
very much like the dysfunctional pattern of melatonin production seen in psoriasis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and multiple sclerosis.
The human eye can detect light with wavelengths between 320 and 750 nanometers. Blue light has
a wavelength of 460 to 480 nanometers.




      Disruption of circadian rhythms has been implicated as a risk factor for a variety of diseases,
including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, and cancer. In fact, there is a direct (and
antagonistic, meaning their actions oppose each other) connection between melatonin and insulin. In
particular, melatonin has a direct effect on the pancreas, both inhibiting insulin secretion and
stimulating glucagon secretion (see here). This may be an important way to control energy metabolism
during sleep, although researchers also believe that it helps protect pancreatic beta cells (the insulin-
producing cells) from overcharge—that is, when the overproduction of insulin wears out the cell to
the point where the beta cells can’t keep up with insulin demand (and type 2 diabetes results). The
relationship between melatonin and insulin goes both ways, since insulin also appears to affect
melatonin secretion by the pineal gland. The cells of the pineal gland have insulin receptors, and,
depending on the time of day, insulin can increase or decrease melatonin synthesis. This implies a
direct connection between regulation of melatonin (and hence sleep quality) and regulation of blood
sugars (and hence insulin secretion)—another argument for avoiding spikes in blood sugar, especially
after dark.
      Insulin sensitivity also varies according to a circadian rhythm (probably related to the rhythm of
a hormone called adiponectin, which is secreted by fat-storing cells), with the least amount of
sensitivity at the end of the day. So a carbohydrate-rich meal late in the day (approximately the last
two hours of your day, assuming a normal sleep schedule with an adequate amount of sleep) increases
blood glucose substantially more than that same meal would earlier in the day.
      Protecting your circadian rhythms is very important for maintaining a variety of functions,
especially the role that circadian rhythms play in supporting quality sleep, which itself is critical for
healing.

     Melatonin versus Serotonin and Digestion
Melatonin plays yet another key role in the body that is critical for managing autoimmune disease,
although it is not directly related to circadian rhythms: it regulates digestion.
     While the melatonin produced by the pineal gland is one of the timekeeping signals of the body’s
circadian clock and a powerful sleep inducer, melatonin is also produced by cells in the
gastrointestinal tract (and the liver and pancreas). Rather than being released into the blood to
circulate through the body, this melatonin mostly remains in the gut and surrounding tissues and acts
as an endocrine signal, a paracrine signal, and an autocrine signal (signals that travel long distances,
signals between adjacent cells, and signals within a cell; see here). In fact, the concentration of
melatonin in the gut is ten to one hundred times as great as in the blood, and the gut as a whole can
house four hundred times as much melatonin as the pineal gland. The small fraction of this melatonin
that does get into the bloodstream accounts for the low levels normally present during the day.
      In order to understand the role that melatonin plays in digestion, it’s helpful to understand the
role that the neurotransmitter serotonin plays. Serotonin is widely understood to be an important
signaling molecule in the brain; it regulates mood, appetite, and sleep. However, approximately 90
percent of the body’s serotonin is actually found in the tissues of the gastrointestinal tract.
      Both melatonin and serotonin are released after eating. And both appear to be important
regulators of peristalsis, the coordinated contraction and relaxation of the muscles of the
gastrointestinal tract that helps move food along. Both melatonin and serotonin are able to cause both
contraction and relaxation of these muscles, depending on a variety of factors, and their effects are in
opposition. For example, in some situations serotonin causes the spastic contraction of gut muscle
tissues, but administration of melatonin releases the spasm and restarts peristalsis. In other situations,
serotonin speeds up peristalsis (and decreases gut-transit time), but melatonin slows it down (and
increases gut-transit time). So, while much about how serotonin and melatonin regulate digestion
remains a mystery, their combined activities appear to be essential for maintaining the balance
between contractile and relaxant activity of gastrointestinal-tract muscle tissues. Both melatonin and
serotonin are actually released into the gut, which may be important for coordinating peristalsis and
synchronizing digestive processes with the arrival of food (more specifically chyme) traveling down
the gastrointestinal tract.
      Melatonin may also support digestion by increasing blood flow to the tissues surrounding the
gut. It has also been shown to be important for healing gastric and intestinal ulcers and may regulate
pancreatic secretion and maintain the integrity of the pancreas. Recall that melatonin is a powerful
antioxidant, and its release into the gut may help prevent tissue damage perhaps caused by the body’s
own hydrochloric acid (stomach acid) and digestive enzymes (see here). In fact, melatonin
supplementation has been shown to be beneficial for pancreatitis, colitis, inflammatory bowel
disease, and colon cancer.
      Is there a link between gut melatonin and circadian rhythms? Although there is no definitive
answer, the gastrointestinal tract can accumulate melatonin from the bloodstream after it is released
from the pineal gland. This might be useful for maintaining the ability to digest food when the body is
not producing adequate melatonin, but prioritizing digestion may come at the expense of sleep.




Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs, are a common class of antidepressive
medications aimed at increasing serotonin levels in the gaps between neural cells.

     Both serotonin and melatonin are synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan. And adequate
intake of tryptophan is necessary for maintaining normal levels of serotonin and melatonin. However,
supporting melatonin and serotonin production appears to be more complicated than simply
consuming foods loaded with tryptophan. For example, tryptophan competes for transport across the
blood-brain barrier with a number of other essential amino acids, specifically a group called large
neutral amino acids, which includes valine, leucine, isoleucine, methionine, phenylalanine, and
tyrosine (see here). The proportion of tryptophan in the blood in relation to these other amino acids
determines how much tryptophan crosses the blood-brain barrier; this, in turn, impacts serotonin
production. It is believed that this competition (which regulates tryptophan entry into the brain) may
be an important signal for the brain with regard to protein quality, since different types and amounts
of dietary protein can either increase or decrease serotonin production according to the relative
abundance of different amino acids. It appears to be important to regularly consume high-quality
protein from a variety of sources, which is already a key tenet of the Paleo Approach. We don’t yet
know how protein quality affects serotonin and melatonin production in the gut, but, interestingly, at
least in pigs, a high-fiber diet increases gastrointestinal melatonin production.
Sleep (Lack of Quality, Quantity, or Both)

In the last fifty years, Americans’ sleep has decreased by an average of one and a half to two hours a
night. That’s a staggering amount of sleep—equivalent to a full month of continuous sleep every year
—that we need but are not getting. Epidemiological studies show a strong correlation between
undersleeping or disturbed sleep and obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Lack of adequate
sleep has been associated with increased morbidity and mortality from all causes: this means that if
you consistently don’t get enough sleep, you have a much higher risk of getting sick and dying. Period.
Not that you can live forever if you sleep more, but sleeping less is a little bit like gambling with your
life. It might just take some years off, and you might still die of old age, but it also increases your risk
of accidental death, chronic disease, and just plain ol’ getting the common cold. Studies have also
evaluated the role sleep plays in healing from specific diseases, like breast cancer, and show that the
less you sleep, the less likely you are to survive.

          “ A good laugh and a long sleep are the best cures in the doctor’s book. ”
          —IRISH PROVERB

      Frankly, we still don’t really know why we need sleep, why we need as much as we do, and
what our bodies are actually doing while we sleep. But it’s obvious that we need sleep. The results
of studies evaluating the physiological changes caused by not sleeping or not getting enough sleep are
enlightening. For those with autoimmune disease, it is especially important to understand the role
sleep plays in inflammation, stimulating the immune system, and regulating hormones (which
themselves modulate the immune system).
     Is Sleeping Too Much a Problem?




A study of 1.1 million men showed that both undersleeping and oversleeping correlate with increased
mortality and shortened life span. For this reason, many scientists postulate that getting too much
sleep can be just as harmful as getting too little. However, it is more likely that sleeping “too much”
is a symptom of disease rather than a contributor to it. For example, several studies have shown that
some infections as well as exposure to low-dose lipopolysaccharide (the proinflammatory component
of the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria; see here) increase the need for sleep, but when drugs that
block one of the major proinflammatory cytokines are administered, sleepiness is reduced. You may
find that, as you initially adopt the Paleo Approach and start to prioritize sleep, you will sleep much
more than the seven to ten hours a night that is typical for most healthy people. This is OK. You will
probably also find that, as your body heals, you will naturally need less sleep.



      Not getting enough sleep causes inflammation, even in young, healthy people. A variety of
studies evaluating the effects of acute sleep deprivation (typically by restricting sleep to four hours a
night) for several consecutive days (typically three to five) have shown increases in both markers of
inflammation and white blood cells in the blood. Specifically, even just three consecutive nights of
not enough sleep can cause increased monocytes, neutrophils, and B cells in the blood, increased
proinflammatory cytokines (including cytokines known to stimulate maturation of naïve T cells into
Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells), increased C-reactive protein (a marker of inflammation), increased total
cholesterol, and increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL).
      Even one night of lost sleep (forty hours without sleep) causes inflammation in young, healthy
people. Just pulling a single all-nighter dramatically increases markers of inflammation in the blood,
including C-reactive protein and proinflammatory cytokines. Studies evaluating not just sleep
deprivation but also recovery after sleep restriction (with the idea of simulating a typical workweek
when someone might get inadequate sleep for four or five nights straight and then try to make up for it
on the weekend) have also shown that the proinflammatory cytokine known to stimulate Th17 cell
development persists for at least two days after increasing sleep to nine hours a night, even though
other measurements of inflammation have returned to normal. This means that even if you try to “catch
up” on your sleep over the weekend, the immune system doesn’t fully recover from the
overstimulation caused by the late nights and early mornings during the week. If you follow this
stereotypical pattern of not getting enough sleep during the week and sleeping in on the weekend, you
run the risk of cumulatively wreaking havoc on the immune system. You can recover from periods of
undersleeping, but it takes persistence, consistency, and commitment—even during the week.
     Sleep deprivation is also associated with increased susceptibility to infection. The less sleep
you get, the more likely you are to catch the common cold. Getting adequate sleep can also protect
you from infection. One study even showed that the longer the duration of sleep, the lower the
incidence of parasitic infections in mammals.
     Inadequate sleep also has profound effects on hunger hormones and metabolism. (Recall that
hunger hormones such as insulin, leptin, ghrelin, and cortisol are important modulators of the immune
system; see here, here, here, and here.) For example, when food intake is measured following sleep
deprivation (five consecutive days of four hours’ sleep), people tend to eat substantially more than
normal (20 percent!). However, it doesn’t take five full days of inadequate sleep to see huge shifts in
insulin, cortisol, and leptin. One study showed that even a single night of partial sleep (four hours)
causes insulin resistance in healthy people. Another study showed that a single night of partial sleep
(three hours in this case) caused lower morning cortisol levels (when cortisol should be at its
highest), higher afternoon and evening cortisol levels (when cortisol should be waning), and high
morning leptin levels. This means that one night of three or four hours’ sleep causes insulin
resistance, dysregulated cortisol, and increased leptin. That’s one night of staying up past your
bedtime because you went to a late movie or a party at the boss’s house. One.
     Inadequate sleep has also been investigated as a possible cause of autoimmune disease. In an
animal model of psoriasis, sleep deprivation caused significant increases in proinflammatory
cytokines, cortisol levels, and specific proteins in the skin associated with symptoms of psoriasis
(like dry, flaking, scaly skin). Mice subjected to sleep deprivation developed multiple sclerosis
earlier than mice allowed to sleep normally. And once they developed the disease, sleep deprivation
increased its progress and the amount of pain felt by the mice. Furthermore, sleep disturbances are
commonly reported by people with chronic inflammatory conditions (such as rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel disease, and asthma)—in some cases, sleep
disturbances are caused by pain or discomfort, and in other cases, sleep disturbances are caused by
disruption to circadian rhythms, or both. Whether the sleep disturbances cause the disease or vice
versa is not well understood (and might be different for different diseases), but sleep disturbances are
known to worsen the course of the disease, aggravate disease symptoms such as pain and fatigue, and
lower quality of life. Yes, sleep is important.
     So how much sleep do you need? I know it’s not helpful, but there is no one answer that applies
to everyone. Consensus is that healthy adults need seven to ten hours per night. If you are trying to
recover from an autoimmune disease, don’t be surprised if what your body needs is on the longer end
of that range or even longer. (Some people with autoimmune disease report needing twelve hours or
more of sleep every night.)

     It’s All Interconnected
Clearly, sleep deprivation makes you more susceptible to infections and chronic illness, including
autoimmune disease. However, the converse is also true: infections and autoimmune disease can
disrupt your sleep. This is partly because of discomfort, as pain is a common symptom of many
autoimmune diseases. However, it is also because immune cells secrete a variety of hormones (such
as melatonin and cortisol) that disrupt circadian rhythms. So disrupted sleep contributes to the
development of autoimmune disease, which itself can disrupt sleep. Some strategies to improve sleep
quality when facing these types of challenges are discussed in chapter 6.
      Getting enough sleep isn’t just about preventing inflammation; it’s also about repairing the body
and regulating the immune system. Certainly, tissue repair is performed predominantly during sleep,
but an important study revealed that regulatory T-cell activities follow a circadian rhythm, meaning
that, just like many functions in the body, they increase and decrease throughout the day. In healthy
people, regulatory T cells are highest in the blood at night and lowest in the morning (like melatonin
and unlike cortisol). The activity of the regulatory T cells also follows a circadian rhythm, having the
most suppressive activity during sleep and the least in the morning. When volunteers were subjected
to sleep deprivation, the suppressive activity of their regulatory T cells decreased (even though the
actual numbers of T cells remained the same).
      This implies that sleep is required for the suppressive activity of regulatory T cells, so if you
want to modulate your immune system and reverse your autoimmune disease, you’d better get your
zzz’s.
      If you have an autoimmune disease and aren’t getting nine hours of sleep every night, I cannot
emphasize enough the importance of moving sleep to the top of your priority list. You need sleep.
Now. Tonight. Every night. Seriously, stop reading and go to bed. Strategies for prioritizing sleep and
what to do if you are trying to get more sleep but just can’t are discussed in chapter 6.
Physical Activity


          “Physical fitness is not only one of the most important keys to a healthy body, it is the
          basis of dynamic and creative intellectual activity. ”
          —JOHN F. KENNEDY

The benefits of physical activity are well known. Increasing muscle mass increases metabolism,
making a healthy weight easier to maintain. Regular physical activity helps improve bone density and
can prevent and even reverse osteoporosis. Physical activity helps regulate both the levels and
sensitivity of a huge variety of essential hormones, including insulin, cortisol, leptin, ghrelin, and
melatonin. It also boosts your mood by directly affecting several neurotransmitters. Getting regular
moderate physical activity decreases risks of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, depression,
and some cancers. In fact, the World Health Organization has identified the lack of physical activity
as the fourth leading risk factor for mortality, being responsible for an estimated 3.2 million deaths
per year globally.




      Physical activity has profound effects on every hormone system in the body and on the immune
system as well. However, not all forms of physical activity are created equal. Whether or not a
specific physical activity affects hormones and the immune system positively depends on a huge
variety of factors, such as the type of activity (aerobic, resistance training, etc.), duration, intensity
(mild, moderate, intense), time of day, whether you are fasted (meaning whether you ate recently),
how long it has been since your previous bout of exercise, whether the exercise is chronic (which
basically means that you exercise regularly), and your health (which includes not only whether you
suffer from a disease but also whether you are at a healthy weight, are physically fit, are under
chronic stress, and routinely get enough sleep). Importantly, strenuous exercise, especially long-
duration aerobic exercise (what you might call “cardio,” but this also includes high-intensity interval
training), can be counterproductive for autoimmune disease and may not only slow healing but even
exacerbate your disease. Just as with many of the micronutrients discussed in chapter 2, you can get
too much of a good thing when it comes to exercise.
      The study of the interaction between physical activity and the immune system is called exercise
immunology. The study of the interaction between physical activity and hormones is called exercise
endocrinology. These are fairly new fields of research, and there are far more unanswered than
answered questions in these areas. What can be stated conclusively, though, is this: being sedentary is
bad for you; regular low- to moderate-intensity exercise is good for you; and excessive exercise (in
either amount or intensity) is bad for you. The International Society of Exercise and Immunology
refers to the relationship between physical activity and resistance to disease as U-shaped—the
bottom of the U is the happy medium, where the right amount and kinds of activity result in the lowest
risk of getting sick. That explains both why sedentary lifestyles increase risk factors for a variety of
diseases and why, for example, elite athletes are at greater risk of upper-respiratory-tract infections.
      Physical activity affects the body’s stress response. A variety of studies have shown that
physical activity improves psychological well-being and mood as well as resilience in the face of
chronic and acute stress. For example, the amount of cortisol secreted in response to an acute
psychological stress was much lower in aerobically fit individuals than in unfit individuals. A variety
of studies have shown that your ability to cope with life stressors decreases with reduced physical
activity. However, physical activity is itself a stressor. The more strenuous the exercise, the more the
HPA axis is stimulated, and the more cortisol is released. And, importantly, the effects of exercise
stress and psychological stress are additive, meaning the total stress you feel is the sum of exercise
stress and psychological stress. When healthy men of average physical fitness were subjected to a
psychological stressor while performing intense physical exercise, more cortisol was released than
either the psychological stress or the exercise alone released. A similar study comparing physically
fit and unfit individuals also showed that the cortisol secreted in response to psychological stress and
exercise stress is additive and that the effect is magnified in unfit individuals. There is some
indication that this cortisol response is much greater with aerobic and endurance exercise and that
resistance training does not stimulate the HPA axis to the same degree. However, exercise programs
that combine resistance training with endurance, such as interval training (more technically called
high-intensity and short-rest workouts), definitely do stimulate cortisol secretion, and some studies
have warned that these types of workouts promote overtraining and could lead to adrenal
insufficiency.




     Physical activity affects circadian rhythms, including melatonin production and sleep quality.
When animals (or humans) are kept in constant-light conditions, they are deprived of the essential
stimulus for maintaining their circadian clock. The consequence is a loss of rhythmicity in biological
functions—the circadian rhythm hormones and the various cellular functions that normally cycle in
sync with the time of day stop doing so.
     Strenuous Exercise Can Cause a Leaky Gut




There is yet another repercussion of overstressing your body with strenuous exercise: strenuous
exercise itself causes increased intestinal permeability. Yes, simply overexerting yourself in the gym
or on the pavement or in the pool can cause a leaky gut.
      Up to half of all long-distance runners experience something called runner’s diarrhea
(colloquially referred to as “runner’s runs,” “runner’s trots,” or “the gingerbread man”). The
symptoms include dizziness, nausea, stomach or intestinal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea, which
occur mainly while running. In order to prioritize blood flow to the heart and skeletal muscles during
exercise, blood flow is diverted away from the gastrointestinal tract and other visceral organs (like
the liver and spleen). This lack of sufficient blood flow results in what is called ischemic injury
(injury that results from inadequate blood supply) to the gut, which disrupts the intestinal barrier and
thus increases intestinal permeability. And, as already discussed (see here), increased intestinal
permeability can allow a variety of toxins from inside the gut to leak into the body.
      While not all endurance athletes suffer overt symptoms, strenuous exercise does appear to
increase intestinal permeability in everyone who indulges in exhaustive exercise, albeit to varying
degrees. A variety of studies have documented increased intestinal permeability in athletes who
reported no gastrointestinal symptoms. And one study showed that well-trained athletes who suffered
from exercise-induced gastrointestinal symptoms experienced significantly more intestinal
permeability after exercise than asymptomatic athletes.
      Vigorous exercise is also associated with a condition called food-dependent, exercise-induced
anaphylaxis, in which the exercise-induced increase in intestinal permeability facilitates the
absorption of allergens from the gastrointestinal tract.
      A few conditions can aggravate the increased intestinal permeability caused by strenuous
exercise. One study showed that the use of ibuprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID;
discussed in more detail on see here), significantly exacerbated both intestinal permeability and
intestinal damage caused by strenuous exercise in well-trained athletes. There is also a strong
correlation between both food intake and the consumption of carbohydrate-dense, electrolyte-
enhanced beverages and gastrointestinal symptoms in endurance athletes. Strenuous exercise inhibits
gastric emptying (the movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine), which is then further
inhibited as the concentration of carbohydrates and salt in the stomach increases, so sugary sports
drinks can actually make the problem worse. Of course, dehydration also causes heightened
symptoms. It remains unknown whether food and overly concentrated sport drinks actually increase
intestinal permeability or simply magnify the symptoms felt by the athlete.
      Environmental conditions also have an impact. One study showed that a sixty-minute run in both
hot (91°F or 33°C) and cool (72°F or 22°C) conditions caused increased intestinal permeability, but
that the amount of endotoxin (bacterial protein from Gram-negative bacteria) detectable in the blood
was much greater after strenuous exercise performed in hot conditions but not in cool conditions. This
implies that strenuous exercise is more inflammatory if performed in the heat. Probiotic treatment may
also help protect the gut from increased permeability caused by strenuous exercise. One study showed
that probiotic supplementation reduced the amount of proinflammatory cytokines in the blood after
strenuous exercise in male athletes and decreased the amount of zonulin (a protein that opens up tight
junctions between the gut enterocytes; see here and here) detectable in the feces.
      Runners, cyclists, and triathletes have been studied for exercise-induced intestinal-barrier
dysfunction. Although there have been no definitive studies on the connection between resistance
training and intestinal permeability, it probably depends on the style of workout and the amount of
rest time between sets. Certainly, high-intensity, short-rest workouts have been shown to increase
cortisol secretion more than traditional resistance training. By contrast, regular exercise at a
relatively low intensity may protect the gastrointestinal tract from becoming diseased. There is
evidence that physical activity reduces the risk of colon cancer, gallstones, diverticulosis, and
inflammatory bowel disease, which is yet another argument for increasing physical activity while
avoiding strenuous exercise.




     It’s All Interconnected
The quality of your diet may impact how exercise affects your immune system. For example, a recent
study showed that fish oil supplementation decreased the amount of inflammation triggered by acute
exercise. Also, consuming carbohydrates immediately before, during, or after exercise may decrease
the amount or duration of inflammation triggered by acute exercise.



     However, even unscheduled exercise prevents this loss of rhythmicity. In addition, exercise
accelerates the recovery of circadian rhythms once a normal light-dark cycle is reintroduced. Similar
benefits from exercise have been shown in people adapting to altered sleep-wake cycles, as in the
case of jet lag and shift work. Long-term moderate aerobic exercise improves sleep patterns in
people with insomnia and reduces disrupted sleep in elderly men. There is no consensus on the
effects of physical exercise on melatonin secretion: different studies have shown that exercise can
increase, decrease, or have no effect on it. Depending on the time of day and the intensity of exercise,
physical activity can make the evening secretion of melatonin happen earlier or later. Generally,
exercising earlier in the day has little to no effect, exercising in the early evening may cause
melatonin to be produced earlier, and exercising late in the evening may cause melatonin to be
produced later. But this is not always the case; a recent study of vigorous nighttime exercise in male
cyclists showed no effect on sleep quality. While more research on this topic is needed, it certainly
appears as though physical activity can help protect and restore circadian rhythms, especially in
conjunction with appropriate light-dark cycles.




     Does This Warning Against Strenuous Exercise Apply to You?
Yes. But what strenuous actually means varies from person to person, depending on your level of
fitness, the type of activity, how often you exercise, how long you exercise at what intensity, how long
you’ve been physically active, how well you manage your stress, and how well you sleep. So you
may have dismissed the cautions against strenuous exercise as not applying to you. Perhaps you’ve
been doing intense workouts regularly for years and don’t think they’re too much for your body.
Perhaps you rely on your workouts to manage stress and can’t imagine life without them. Perhaps you
love what your intense workouts do for your physical appearance. Regardless, please critically
evaluate the role that exercise plays in your autoimmune disease. There is such a thing as exercise
addiction, known to have similar psychological and physiological effects as alcohol and drug
addiction. While it may be true that the amount of physical activity you do is completely appropriate
for your body and may be helping you manage your autoimmune disease, don’t let loving your sport
interfere with your ability to heal.



      Physical activity is well known to improve insulin sensitivity. During and immediately after
exercise, glucose uptake in muscle tissue is enhanced through an increase in glucose transporters in
cell membranes. These are the same GLUT4 transporters that increase in cell membranes in response
to insulin binding with its receptor (see here). But exercise stimulates an increase in GLUT4
transporters independent of insulin. While this increase in glucose transporters lasts only about two
hours after exercise has ended, the muscle cells also become more insulin-sensitive after exercise.
When exercise is regular, many adaptations in muscle tissue take place, including persistent increased
insulin sensitivity, increased production of GLUT4 transporters, and increased blood-vessel
formation.
      Physical activity has very complicated effects on both the innate and adaptive immune systems
and largely depends on whether exercise is acute (meaning strenuous exercise that is not part of a
regular training routine) or chronic (that is, regular). It is important to understand that acute exercise
doesn’t just refer to someone who is completely out of shape jumping into an intense cardio
kickboxing class. Anyone working out at a level that is substantially more intense than she is used to
or for substantially longer than he is used to is basically doing acute exercise. And, depending on the
exercise or sport or intensity, some people do acute exercise every time they work out.
      Acute exercise, whether endurance or resistance training, stimulates inflammation. Both
neutrophils and natural killer cells are mobilized, and their numbers dramatically increase in the
blood following exercise, the magnitude of which is related to both the intensity and duration of the
exercise. Acute exercise also stimulates phagocytosis (eating of stuff by macrophages and monocytes)
and increases the production of reactive oxygen species and proinflammatory cytokines. However,
regular exercise does not appear to appreciably increase neutrophils in the blood and may reduce
both the numbers of blood monocytes and their reactivity to inflammatory stimuli. In fact, a few
reports indicate that consistent training may provide anti-inflammatory benefits in those with chronic
inflammatory conditions. By contrast, other studies show that even regular training increases natural
killer cells and that this effect is probably exacerbated with intense training.




     Physical Activity Should Be Fun
Maybe it goes without saying that whatever physical activity you incorporate into your life should be
something you enjoy, but given the prominent role that stress plays in autoimmune disease and the
prominent role that having fun plays in managing stress, it seems important to emphasize that being
physical should be fun. My yoga teacher is fond of saying, “Do it so that you like it, so that you like
doing it,” which I think is a very insightful philosophical idea. Beyond the fact that having fun is good
for you, you are far more likely to stick with doing something you enjoy and continue to carve time out
of your schedule for it.



     The effect of acute exercise on the adaptive immune system is only partly understood. During
and immediately after acute exercise, helper T-cell and cytotoxic T-cell numbers increase in the
blood but rapidly return to normal. Furthermore, there is a differential effect on Th1 cells versus Th2
cells. Specifically, acute exercise decreases the relative numbers of Th1 cells and increases the
numbers of Th2 cells. Not surprisingly, given that Th2 cells are important modulators of B-cell
activation, there is a concurrent increase in B cells in the blood. In the recovery period, the numbers
of T cells and B cells drop below preworkout levels, indicating a suppression of the adaptive
immune system, before recovering to normal levels relatively quickly after exercise. Studies of elite
athletes show that, in general, the number of T cells and B cells measured twenty-four hours after
exercise are the same as in nonathletes, indicating that regular training probably does not cause
persistent changes in the adaptive immune system. Problems arise, however, when there is
insufficient recovery time between intense workouts, in which case immune suppression can result.
     There have been relatively few studies evaluating the effects of exercise on people with
autoimmune disease or other chronic inflammatory illnesses. Certainly, many questions remain. In
some, but not all, studies, acute exercise intensified inflammation (resulting in either higher levels of
inflammation or long-lasting inflammation post-exercise) in those with inflammatory diseases. The
potential benefits of regular exercise in people with inflammatory diseases are even more difficult to
specify, with some studies showing increases in markers of inflammation, others showing decreases,
and some studies showing no effect. This variability in results probably reflects the intensity of the
exercise and may indicate that people with inflammatory diseases are more susceptible to the
negative consequences of overly intense exercise. This idea is supported by a recent study in which
patients with sarcoidosis had heightened adrenocorticotropic hormone release (but not cortisol; see
here) in response to acute exercise.
     While the effects of physical activity are complicated and are still only beginning to be
understood, it is important to emphasize that physical activity (at least the low- to moderate-intensity
kind) is crucial for health. Furthermore, the benefits of physical activity go far beyond what most of
us focus on—that is, physical appearance. Physical activity is part of the Paleo Approach because of
the essential regulatory effects that regular, moderate-intensity physical activity have on hormones
and the immune system. It’s not about looking good in a bathing suit. That is not the goal, nor should it
be for those with autoimmune disease. In fact, as discussed in more detail on see here, the super-lean
movie-star bodies that so many of us yearn for are probably, in most cases, not even healthy for us.
This isn’t to say that you can’t lose weight if you are overweight or gain weight if you are
underweight. You can. And you can certainly get stronger, more muscular, more flexible, more agile,
and more physically fit. But I can’t say this strongly enough: being thin or built is not the goal—being
healthy is.
     Most of us feel that we should get more exercise, but for those with autoimmune disease, a better
focus would be on becoming more physically active. Physical activity is a general term, defined by
the World Health Organization as “any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires
energy expenditure.” By contrast, exercise is physical activity for a specific purpose, such as
improvement of physical condition or competition. As a society, we often use the terms
interchangeably. The idea behind focusing on physical activity is to increase the amount of low- to
moderate-intensity activity while avoiding exhaustive and strenuous exercise. However, it is difficult
to define exactly what constitutes overly strenuous exercise, because overly strenuous depends on the
individual. A two-mile run may be a beneficial amount of moderately intense exercise for one person
but a detrimental amount of high-intensity exercise for another. You will have to use some common
sense.
     Of all the recommendations in The Paleo Approach, the types and amounts of physical activity
will vary the most from individual to individual. The goal is to include plenty of physical activity in
your life every day without overstressing your body. This doesn’t mean that you can’t increase
physical strength and stamina, but it does mean that you should do so gradually. For those of you
whose starting point is a completely sedentary lifestyle, this will mean incorporating into your daily
routine gentle physical activity like walking, yoga, and swimming, slowly building intensity and
duration. Strategies for including more moderate-intensity physical activity in your life are discussed
in more detail in chapter 6. For those accustomed to intense bouts at the gym several times a week,
this will mean reducing the intensity of your workouts and prioritizing adequate recovery time
between workouts to ensure that you are not overstressing your body. When it comes to exercise and
autoimmune disease, slow and steady really does win the race.




     “But I’m an Athlete!”




If you are an athlete battling an autoimmune disease, you may have noticed a recurring theme. Your
strenuous training sessions may be partly to blame for your autoimmune disease. So, yes, I am asking
you to pull back on the intensity of your training to allow your body to heal. You have to take your
training into consideration in relation to your disease. However, this doesn’t necessarily mean that
you have to give up your sport entirely. Reducing the intensity of your training sessions and increasing
your recovery time between sessions will probably make a big difference. In addition:
    Do not eat for at least thirty minutes before the beginning of training or competition.
    During intense exercise, consume approximately sixteen ounces per hour of a beverage that
    contains less than 10 percent carbohydrates, but includes both glucose and fructose and
    electrolytes.
    Avoid intense training in hot weather.
    Take a probiotic supplement (see here and here).
    Make sure that you are getting ample recovery time between training sessions (at least twenty-
    four hours) and enough sleep every night.
    Be sure to eat enough food to support recovery and repair between training sessions.
    Critically evaluate the role that your training plays in your autoimmune disease.




For more specific recommendations for athletes, check out The Paleo Diet for Athletes, by
Loren Cordain and Joe Friel.
Hunger Hormones Revisited: The Effect of Meal Frequency

When and how often you eat is truly a lifestyle factor (whereas what you eat is a dietary factor), and it
may be an important contributor to the successful management of your autoimmune disease. A quick
Google search will yield hundreds of resources telling you that the healthiest way to eat is to graze,
eating small quantities nearly constantly throughout the day. While this approach may be useful in
regulating blood-sugar levels for the metabolically damaged, it does not support normal hunger-
hormone regulation and may be counterproductive in the management of autoimmune disease.
      The original studies that supported the assertion that grazing was healthier were correlative
studies showing that the more frequently you eat, the more likely you are to be a healthy weight. While
correlation is a great starting place for studying the link between two things, it does not prove
causation. This particular correlation evaporates once exercise is brought into the picture.
Interestingly, prospective studies (a type of study in which, in this case, people are put on specific
diets and then monitored for health and weight changes as opposed to a correlative study, in which
people just fill out surveys and the researcher looks for statistical trends) have universally shown that
increasing eating frequency yields no benefit in individuals of normal weight and results in a tendency
toward weight gain and higher risk of diabetes in overweight people.
      How often you eat, what you eat, and how much you eat also have profound effects on the
regulation of hunger hormones. It is important to feel hungry and to have an empty stomach to
maximize ghrelin release. But you can’t push this so far that you spike cortisol and decrease leptin
sensitivity. It is also important to be full, especially by consuming quality proteins, fats, and low-
glycemic-load carbohydrates, including fiber. This is because the lows of ghrelin are just as
important as the highs, and eating this way supports better circadian rhythms.
      So what is the optimal meal frequency? Analysis of hunter-gatherer and hunter-gatherer-farmer
populations (modern and historical) shows that these populations typically eat one large meal in the
afternoon or early evening. A small meal of leftovers is sometimes ingested in the morning, as are
small amounts of food as it is gathered. Not only does this not look anything like the five or six small
meals a day that are erroneously advocated for optimal metabolism, but it doesn’t even look like the
three “square” meals with which grazing is contrasted.
      When we start to consider eating one meal a day (without restricting calories), there are some
interesting research findings. One study showed that eating one meal a day in the absence of calorie
restriction improves body composition and cardiovascular risk factors and reduces cortisol. Another
study showed that eating one meal a day reduces inflammation by preventing circulating white blood
cells (specifically monocytes) from producing cytokines. And there is speculation that decreased
meal frequency would result in decreased oxidative stress and increased leptin and insulin
sensitivity.
      Though compelling, these studies do not make a strong case for one meal a day, especially in the
presence of autoimmune disease.
      The concept of intermittent fasting has gained traction within the Paleo community, in part
because some studies have shown that repeated short-term fasts (typically sixteen to twenty-four
hours) improve our ability to handle stress (meaning that less cortisol is released in response to
psychological stressors) and because intermittent fasting stimulates autophagy (akin to spring cleaning
in every cell, with cells breaking down components that are not working properly to be recycled and
rebuilt). However, those with autoimmune disease are less likely to experience such benefits. The
issue with skipping breakfast (or skipping breakfast and lunch) is that your body increases cortisol in
order to stimulate glycolysis or gluconeogenesis to raise your blood sugar so that you have energy for
the day. If cortisol levels and rhythmicity are not normal, this extra cortisol release to help regulate
blood sugars can contribute to cortisol dysregulation or cortisol resistance. Furthermore, there is
evidence that the process at work in autoimmune disease inhibits autophagy. This means that the
beneficial adaptations to fasting that healthy people enjoy are less likely to take place not just in
people with autoimmune disease but in anyone dealing with chronic stress. In fact, repeated
intermittent fasting (which is really what eating one meal a day amounts to) is used as a model of
chronic stress in animal studies. In animals, this activates liver macrophages, increases fat
accumulation in the liver, raises blood cholesterol, and accelerates the DNA damage in the liver and
spleen caused by a high-fat diet. In humans, one study showed lower glucose tolerance (i.e., higher
insulin resistance) in people who ate only one meal a day. Furthermore, healthy women are more
likely to experience lowered glucose tolerance in response to intermittent fasting than healthy men, so
the jury is still out on whether intermittent fasting provides benefits in women in general.
      A good argument can be made for eating breakfast. In fact, studies evaluating hunger and food
cravings later in the day in relation to whether people ate or skipped breakfast imply that hunger
hormones are much better regulated when you eat breakfast. People who routinely skip breakfast are
known to have greater risks of cardiovascular disease and obesity. This might not be directly related
to any specific benefit of eating early in the day as much as to the fact that eating breakfast seems to
make it easier to make healthy choices the rest of the day.




The starch-digesting enzyme salivary amylase also displays a circadian rhythm and reaches its
peak in the early evening, implying that it might be easier to digest starchy carbohydrates at
dinner.

     The relationship between melatonin and insulin implies that eating too late in the day may
disrupt sleep. In fact, clinical trials confirm that eating even a small snack within one hour of going to
bed negatively impacts sleep quality. By contrast, eating a large, carbohydrate-rich meal four hours
before bedtime improves sleep quality. Although there is no exact formula for meal composition and
timing required for optimal sleep, not eating for at least two hours before going to bed is generally
conducive to better sleep.




     An Exception to the Rule
While eating large but less frequent meals seems to be optimal for regulating hunger hormones and
minimizing postprandial inflammation (see here), this just won’t work for everyone. Eating a large
meal puts a strain on the digestive system, and for those with severe gastrointestinal injury and
inflammation, as might occur in celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, or autoimmune diseases
affecting digestive organs (liver, gallbladder, or pancreas), eating large meals, at least initially, may
cause extreme gastrointestinal distress. As discussed on see here, moving away from grazing to eating
fewer but larger, well-spaced meals does not need to be a fast transition. This is especially true for
those who need to give their bodies time to heal before tackling this piece of the puzzle. Supplements
that support digestion may boost the healing process in some cases and ease the transition to larger
meals, and are discussed here.



      Because people with autoimmune disease are more likely to have cortisol dysregulation (and
dysregulated circadian rhythms and abnormal insulin and leptin levels and sensitivity), there must be
a balance between eating frequently enough to encourage normal cortisol levels and insulin sensitivity
but infrequently enough for ghrelin to be elevated between meals and leptin sensitivity maintained.
For most people, this is likely to mean two to four meals (or three meals and one snack) per day, the
first being breakfast shortly after waking up and the last being two to four hours before going to bed.
The less frequently you eat, the bigger your meals will be. Individual preference and perhaps a little
trial and error will determine what works for you. The bottom line is that eating larger and less
frequent meals is far better than grazing. Strategies for changing your eating habits are discussed in
more detail here.
Medications


          “It is increasingly observed that the majority of pharmaceutical drugs, even those
          believed to have minimal adverse effects, such as proton-pump inhibitors and anti-
          hypertensives, in fact adversely affect immune development and functions and are most
          likely also deleterious to microbiota. ”
          —STIG BENGMARK, MD, PHD,
          “Gut Microbiota, Immune Development and Function,”Pharmacological Research 69
          (March 2013): 87–113.

It has become increasingly common to take medications, especially over-the-counter medications,
without much more thought than the vague hope that a dose of this or that may alleviate immediate
symptoms. We trust that, because drugs like aspirin and ibuprofen are so ubiquitous, they are
harmless. We also trust that the drugs prescribed by our doctors, like steroids and proton-pump
inhibitors, will help us. But many of the medications routinely taken for pain and inflammation and
routinely prescribed to manage autoimmune disease symptoms are completely counterproductive
when it comes to healing. Perhaps more insidious, many of these medications do reduce pain or
decrease inflammation, thereby masking their detrimental effects on intestinal permeability, gut
microflora, and the immune system. The body cannot completely heal while these medications are
being used.
      It’s important for you to understand which medications are crucial to avoid so you can open a
dialogue with your doctor. Some, but not all, of these medications can easily be discontinued. Some
are appropriate to take in certain circumstances, and some are even lifesaving in some cases. You
will need to work with your doctor to determine whether or not to taper doses while also fully
committing yourself to the Paleo Approach and doing everything you can to promote healing.
      What types of medications are doing more harm than good? As a general rule, any medication
that lists gastrointestinal symptoms as possible side effects are best avoided if at all possible. This is
because constipation, diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain, and vomiting are fairly good indicators of
damage or irritation to the gastrointestinal tract. Given that so many of the recommendations in The
Paleo Approach are aimed at healing the gut and reversing gut dysbiosis, these types of medications
generally range from being unhelpful to completely undermining your other efforts. While the
following list is by no means exhaustive, the biggest (and most commonly used) offenders are:


     Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and naproxen, which are
     increasingly recommended (or prescribed) to patients with autoimmune disease with the goal of
     relieving pain and reducing inflammation
     Immune-suppressing drugs, including corticosteroids (such as prednisone) and DMARDs (such
     as methotrexate)
     Drugs that interfere with digestion, often prescribed to treat acid reflux
     Hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics
NSAIDs

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) include many familiar over-the-counter medications,
the three most common of which are acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin,
Nurofen, etc.), and naproxen (Aleve, Midol, etc.) These are routinely prescribed in higher doses to
manage pain and reduce inflammation. However, they have a high incidence of gastrointestinal side
effects. The reason for this is that NSAIDs cause damage to the intestinal barrier, and their chronic
use carries significant risks of ulcers, hemorrhage, and perforation (a rip or tear in the intestine).




      It is important to understand that even a single dose of NSAIDs causes an increase in intestinal
permeability, even in healthy people. There are several ways NSAIDs do this.
      The first discovered mechanism by which NSAIDs cause gastrointestinal injury is through
inhibition of an enzyme called cyclooxygenase. Inhibition of cyclooxygenase prevents the metabolism
of arachidonic acid, which decreases the formation of prostaglandins and thromboxanes (see here).
This is how NSAIDs achieve their anti-inflammatory effects, blood-thinning effects, and pain-
relieving effects. However, it also damages the gut barrier, resulting in intestinal lesions (which can
eventually become ulcers or worse). It turns out that cyclooxygenase is actually an essential enzyme
for maintaining the integrity of the gut’s mucous layer (see here). Once this enzyme is disrupted, the
gut is far more susceptible to damage from other sources (like toxins and exercise-induced intestinal-
barrier disruption).




Cyclooxygenase is the enzyme inhibited by a class of drugs called cox2 inhibitors, which are also
prescribed for inflammation—although NSAIDs inhibit both cox1 and cox2 forms of
cyclooxygenase.

     Studies have also shown that NSAIDs inhibit production of the proteins that form the tight
junctions between gut enterocytes (see here), which causes the tight junctions to open. This might be
because NSAIDs impair mitochondrial metabolism (see here), which means that the gut enterocytes
cannot produce enough energy to maintain their tight junctions. NSAIDs also weaken the gut barrier
by causing changes in blood flow in the capillaries that supply blood to the tissues of and surrounding
the gut. Furthermore, NSAIDs seem to increase the production of leukotrienes (see here), causing the
activation and recruitment of neutrophils from the blood, which have been implicated as contributing
to the gastrointestinal damage caused by NSAIDs.
      Unlike some of the other drugs discussed in this section, NSAIDs are rarely used as lifesaving
necessities and are most typically used for symptom relief. In these cases, NSAIDs should be avoided
—they are just not worth the damage they cause to the intestinal barrier. The only exception is if
NSAIDs are used as blood thinners. In some autoimmune diseases, like antiphospholipid syndrome,
daily baby aspirin is often suggested to prevent blood clots (which can be life-threatening) from
forming. It is exceptionally important to work with your doctor to be weaned off aspirin in this case,
since removing blood thinners if you have a clotting disorder can be dangerous. You might discuss the
possibility of using an alternative blood thinner, like a fairly high dose of fish oil, with your doctor
(see here).

Corticosteroids

Many physicians prescribe corticosteroids (oral, injected, topical, inhaled, or intranasal, depending
on your symptoms) to treat the symptoms of autoimmune disease. The need for steroid drugs arises
from the fact that the body is cortisol-resistant and the immune system is in overdrive (see here).
These drugs are a synthetic form of cortisol. Since you are already familiar with the ramifications of
chronic stress, it is easy to discuss the ramifications of steroid drugs.
      Corticosteroid drugs work by binding to glucocorticoid receptors in immune cells, signaling the
resolution of inflammation and immunity. However, they also flood the body with glucocorticoids
(i.e., cortisol), typically with no heed to the need for fluctuations in levels throughout the day
(although this is why taking prednisone in the morning often minimizes side effects), which causes a
further increase in glucocorticoid-receptor resistance. This is why a course of steroids typically
involves tapering the dose and why symptoms often return (sometimes with a vengeance) after a
course of steroids is completed. Steroids also compromise the immune system, contribute to a leaky
gut, and hinder the normal healing process.
      Corticosteroid drugs can be lifesaving in some instances, although the majority of the time they
are used for symptom relief. Most people dislike taking steroids because of the intense side effects,
like appetite stimulation, cravings for calorie-dense foods, weight gain, low energy, restlessness, and
trouble sleeping. As you can imagine, these side effects themselves have consequences for the
immune system. Corticosteroids are frequently prescribed for autoimmune disease patients during a
flare to help suppress the immune system, but patients often find that once they start taking steroids,
it’s very difficult to stop. This is because once you discontinue them, the immune system is no longer
inhibited, but the body is even more cortisol-receptor-resistant than it was before. In fact, for some
autoimmune diseases, steroids are contraindicated because of the rebound effects after stopping a
course of them.
    If you are taking corticosteroids to manage your autoimmune disease, you will need to work with
your doctor to very slowly taper while you heal your body with the diet and lifestyle
recommendations of The Paleo Approach.

PPIs, H2 Blockers, Antacids, Laxatives, and Antidiarrheals


Whether or not gastrointestinal symptoms are technically part of your autoimmune disease, because of
the role that a leaky gut and gut dysbiosis play in the development of autoimmune disease, symptoms
such as bloating, heartburn, acid reflux, constipation, and diarrhea are still common. It is also
common for people to treat these symptoms with over-the-counter or prescription medications aimed
at decreasing stomach acid, increasing gastrointestinal motility, or decreasing gastrointestinal
motility. The use of these medications needs to be critically evaluated, since many may do more harm
than good. Specifically, you should avoid:


     Proton-pump inhibitors (drugs like pantoprazole, omeprazole, and lansoprazole, which include
     brands such as Pantoloc, Nexium, and Prevacid).
     H2 blockers (drugs like famotidine and ranitidine, which include brands such as Pepcid and
     Zantac).
     Laxatives (stimulant laxatives like bisacodyl and senna, castor oil, polyethylene glycol 3550,
     and, to a lesser extent, purely osmotic laxatives like milk of magnesia).
     Antidiarrheal drugs (antispasmodic antidiarrheals like loperamide and bismuth subsalicylate
     and, to a lesser extent, bulking agents like psyllium).


     Optimal digestion is important, both so that your body can absorb all the nutrients from your
food and to avoid feeding gut dysbiosis. Both the importance of adequate stomach acid and how
bacterial overgrowths can mimic the symptoms of stomach acid overproduction were discussed on
see here. Taking any medication that reduces stomach acid or that affects gastric motility impacts your
body’s ability to digest and absorb nutrients. Antacids, such as calcium carbonate (Tums or Rolaids),
are generally associated with adverse effects only when taken chronically or in large doses. Perhaps
not surprisingly, the most common side effect of antacids is constipation (probably caused by both
inhibition of digestion and bacterial overgrowth). In large doses (or if kidney function is impaired),
calcium carbonate can lead to hypercalcaemia (high blood-calcium levels), which has a variety of
deleterious effects on the body.
     While there are certainly situations in which proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs; a class of drugs that
reduce stomach acid secretion by the cells that line the stomach, called parietal cells) are
exceptionally useful, as a class they are recognized as one of the most overprescribed medications.
Their use, which has greatly supplanted the use of H2 blockers (which also reduce stomach acid
production but through a different biochemical effect on parietal cells), is associated with a variety of
adverse effects, including malabsorption of nutrients (which can cause anemia, among other
conditions), decreased bone density, increased risk of Salmonella and Clostridium difficile
infections, and increased risk of cancer. Furthermore, proton-pump inhibitors have been shown to
directly interfere with the enzymes in lysosomes (which thwarts antigen presentation; see here and
here) and the activity of cytotoxic T cells. Concerns over systematically compromised immunity from
long-term PPI use have been raised in the medical literature. A recent study showed that the use of
proton-pump inhibitors in elderly patients discharged from acute-care hospitals increased their
chances of dying within one year. And the use of both PPIs and H2 blockers is associated with
increased symptoms and risk of hospitalization in people with inflammatory bowel disease. There
also appears to be an effect on gut microflora. A study in premature infants showed that H2 blockers
reduce the diversity of the gut microorganisms. And the long-term use of PPIs has been shown to
increase the risk of susceptibility to enteric bacterial infection by improving the ability of pathogenic
bacteria to colonize the gut.
      As a general rule, laxatives cause damage to epithelial cells that line the gut. There is no
consensus as to whether this damage increases risk for disease, but anything that causes damage or
irritation to the gut should be of concern to someone going to great lengths to heal the gut in order to
reverse an autoimmune disease. Stimulant laxatives—sennoside A (senna), bisacodyl, and castor oil
—are known to damage the intestinal epithelial cells, stimulate the cells that line the gut to divide
(proliferate) rapidly, and cause inflammation. Bisacodyl and phenolphthalein work by increasing
epithelial permeability (and stimulating fluid transport across the compromised gut barrier).
Fermentable laxatives like lactulose may stimulate cell division through overproduction of short-
chain fatty acids by the gut microflora (see here). Polyethylene glycol 3350 inhibits repair of the gut
barrier after injury (although it may not cause injury itself). Osmotic laxatives, such as milk of
magnesia, which work because the poorly absorbable ions like magnesium or phosphate help draw
water into the large intestine, appear to be the safest laxatives, although they can cause metabolic
disturbances, particularly in the presence of renal impairment.
      There are two main classes of antidiarrheal drugs: antispasmodic drugs (loperamide and
bismuth subsalicylate are the most common) and thickeners (typically fiber supplements, such as
psyllium). While it’s important to eat lots of vegetables and fruit, in large part because of their fiber,
concentrated fiber supplements can feed gut dysbiosis (not to mention that vegetables and fruits are
also full of vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants). However, the occasional use of fiber supplements
is not associated with adverse effects (except perhaps when taking too much, which can cause
constipation). Loperamide (the most common brand name is Imodium) is an antispasmodic drug that
slows down intestinal motility. Its side effects are directly related to its impact on bowel motility and
include abdominal pain, distention, bloating, nausea, vomiting, and constipation. There is some
concern that loperamide is contraindicated for those with neurological disorders. (It has specifically
been studied in Alzheimer’s disease, although there is no consensus yet.) Loperamide has many
known drug interactions, meaning that taking it concurrently with some other medications can cause
adverse effects. And perhaps most important (because infections are more common in those with
autoimmune disease), loperamide has been shown to worsen diarrhea caused by Clostridium difficile
and worsen parasitical infections with Entamoeba histolytica. Bismuth subsalicylate (the active
ingredient in Pepto-Bismol) is neurotoxic (because of the heavy metal bismuth), although symptoms
have been reported only after large doses or with chronic use. However, bismuth accumulates in
several areas of the body after just six weeks, even when people take the recommended dose.
     Acid reflux, constipation, and diarrhea can be life-threatening for some people, so you shouldn’t
stop taking drugs to treat those conditions if that’s the case. But you should work with your doctor to
uncover and address the root cause(s) of these symptoms in addition to adopting the Paleo Approach.
People with persistent gastrointestinal symptoms after embracing the Paleo Approach are likely to
benefit from digestive-support and probiotic supplements (see here and here). If your gastrointestinal
symptoms are limited to persistent acid reflux, bloating, or constipation, being evaluated and treated
for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth may be helpful (see here). People whose diarrhea hasn’t
abated after implementing the Paleo Approach may find it helpful to be evaluated and treated for
parasitic infections or infections like Clostridium difficile (see here).




Hormonal Contraceptives

Sex hormones play a complex role in regulating the immune system (hormones and the immune system
are discussed in chapter 1), and messing with them by using oral contraceptives or other forms of
hormonal contraceptives (such as the patch or injections) may make it a lot harder to manage your
autoimmune disease through diet and lifestyle.
     However, the use of hormonal contraceptives is a very personal choice. After critically
evaluating your own circumstances and doing your own risk-benefit analysis, some of you may decide
that continued use of these contraceptives is the best option. That doesn’t mean that you can’t
implement the other recommendations in The Paleo Approach and see how well your body heals.
However, I urge you to be mindful that contraceptives could be the culprit if you do not experience as
much improvement as you believe possible.

DMARDs
According to the American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association (AARDA), “Commonly used
immunosuppressant treatments lead to devastating long-term side effects.” As already discussed,
immune-suppressing corticosteroid drugs can increase cortisol resistance and perpetuate a leaky gut.
So while they do reduce inflammation and immune activation, they also thwart healing. Disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are another class of strong immunosuppressant drugs
given to very ill patients. They carry substantial risks of serious infectison and cancer with long-term
use—not to mention that some of these drugs have adverse effects even with short-term use.
      Methotrexate (common brand names include Rheumatrex and Trexall) is a purine-metabolism
inhibitor, originally developed as a chemotherapy drug and also used to terminate early pregnancies.
It is one of the most frequently prescribed DMARDs and is the one with the most destructive side
effects. As a chemotherapy drug, it inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis, which is more toxic for rapidly
dividing cells (like cancer cells) than cells with normal growth rates. It also suppresses T-cell
activation and accumulation in tissues and inhibits the signals from some proinflammatory cytokines.
Even at the low doses typical for immune suppression, it significantly increases intestinal
permeability through an effect on the tight junctions between gut enterocytes. This increase in
intestinal permeability is partly responsible for the side effects of methotrexate, which include
diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and liver injury. Azathioprine is a drug that works similarly.




      Penicillamine is often given to patients who can’t tolerate the side effects of methotrexate,
especially in the case of rheumatoid arthritis. It works by radically reducing the number of T cells,
inhibiting macrophage function, and preventing collagen cross-linking. It is a powerful chelating
agent, meaning that it binds to metals, in particular copper (see here). When it binds to copper in
cells, reactive oxygen species (see here) form, which are toxic to cells, especially liver and kidney
cells. Penicillamine is also known to cause autoimmune diseases, in particular drug-induced systemic
lupus erythematosus, myasthenia gravis, and Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (all of which may
persist after the drug is discontinued).
      Other DMARDs are also known to cause autoimmune diseases as a possible side effect. Tumor
necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors (TNF-alpha is an important proinflammatory cytokine)—including
infliximab (Remicade), etanercept (Enbrel), and adalimumab (Humira)—increase the risk of
psoriasis, dermatomyositis, vasculitis, vitiligo, and drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus.
Developing interstitial lung disease (with greater than 30 percent mortality) is another possible side
effect. However, TNF-alpha inhibitors are typically better tolerated than other DMARDs and have no
known impact on the integrity of the gut barrier. Their use to transition from drug-managed
autoimmune disease to diet-and-lifestyle-managed autoimmune disease may be appropriate for some
people.
Antibiotics

Antibiotics are lifesaving medications and should not be avoided in the event of serious infection.
However, the standard treatment for some autoimmune diseases of long-term courses of antibiotics
may do more harm than good.
     Antibiotics are not selective for whatever infectious bacteria are making you sick. One side
effect of antibiotics is that they also kill your gut microflora (see here). Some strains of probiotic
bacteria are more susceptible to antibiotics than others, and different antibiotics kill different types of
bacteria more readily, so some strains are killed but not others, which causes gut dysbiosis. Bacteria
from the Bacteroides genus (one of the most dominant types of bacteria in the healthy gut) are
particularly sensitive to a variety of antibiotics. Other heavily impacted probiotic genera include
Clostridium and Bifidobacterium. When these good bacteria are killed off, other strains may grow
disproportionately numerous. Furthermore, the use of antibiotics early in life has been associated
with increased risk of asthma, attributable to a change in the gut microflora.




     When long-term antibiotic use is prescribed for patients with specific autoimmune diseases,
there is typically some initial benefit, most likely because the antibiotic reduces bacterial
overgrowth. However, the benefits usually wane over time, which may reflect the lack of immune
system modulation because of less diversity and smaller numbers of healthy bacteria in the gut. If you
are on antibiotics and not experiencing benefits, you should work with your doctor to get off them.
Eating lots of vegetables, omega-3 fatty acids, and probiotic-rich foods (or taking probiotic
supplements, which is discussed in more detail in chapter 8) can help restore an appropriate amount
and diversity of gut microbiota.
     Recall that infection contributes to autoimmune disease, with persistent infections being
particularly important triggers for some people. Some small studies evaluating long-term courses of
antibiotics (specifically tetracyclines) to treat persistent infections as underlying causes of
autoimmune disease have had some fairly good results. Other studies have concluded that these
antibiotics are no better for autoimmune diseases than other commonly used therapies. Tetracycline
antibiotics are also associated with drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus and autoimmune
hepatitis. A long-term course of tetracyclines is an option (although there is no consensus about how
effective this is) for those with diagnosed underlying persistent infections and who are not
experiencing benefits with the Paleo Approach.

Going Off Medications
Not all medications are harmful or counterproductive. And, as mentioned, there are certainly
circumstances in which the medications discussed in this section are clearly necessary. However, the
least common denominator among these medications is that they tend to be overprescribed.
      If you are now realizing that a medication you take to manage your autoimmune disease may
actually be contributing to the perpetuation of your disease, you may be feeling frustrated, backed into
a corner, and even betrayed: as long as you continue to take any of the medications I’ve just
discussed, your body will not be able to fully heal. But going off your meds might not be easy or
practical. So what to do?
      The most important thing is to work with your doctor. Changing, tapering, or discontinuing your
medication—especially if you are taking prescription drugs, but also any daily over-the-counter
medication that your doctor may have recommended—should, without exception, be done under the
supervision of a health care professional.
      I must also emphasize that changing your medications, especially if you are taking
immunosuppressants, is not, in most cases, something to tackle when you initially adopt the Paleo
Approach. By improving your diet and addressing lifestyle factors first, you will be able heal your
body as much as you can while you are still taking these drugs, which will significantly help you
adjust to discontinuing them.




     Is Medication-Free the Goal?
The goal is to stop taking medications that may interfere with your body’s ability to heal, but that
doesn’t necessarily mean being drug-free. In the case of autoimmune diseases that damage specific
organs, such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Addison’s disease, medications that support organ
function will, in most cases, still be necessary.
     While diet and lifestyle modifications can keep your body from attacking itself, depending on
how long you have had your disease, what specific autoimmune disease you have, and how
aggressive your disease is, permanent damage may have been done. Some treatments that you may
have already undergone (such as radioactive iodine ablation for Graves’ disease or bowel resections
for Crohn’s disease) may have also impaired organ function. This may mean that you will have to take
organ-support supplements for the rest of your life. So if the damage is done, why bother making such
huge changes in your diet and lifestyle? Because these changes give your body the opportunity to heal
—and you won’t know how much organ function you can recover until you try. Plus, they stop your
disease from causing even more damage and prevent the development of additional autoimmune
diseases.
     You should also get routine testing for organ function. Since taking too high a dose of these types
of medications can cause problems, and since it is entirely possible that your body will heal enough
for you to eventually decrease or even discontinue these medications, routine testing and dose
adjustment may be necessary for a while. Once again, working with your doctor is essential.



      In many cases, the dietary changes suggested in this book will greatly diminish the need for
medications. For example, increasing the intake of omega-3 fatty acids (while decreasing the intake of
omega-6 fatty acids) has been shown to decrease the need for NSAIDs in those with rheumatoid
arthritis and asthma. Correcting micronutrient deficiencies has been shown to considerably improve
symptoms in a variety of autoimmune diseases. In many other cases, simply making the changes
suggested here will allow you to stop your medications completely.
Putting It All Together

You may have noticed that in the last two chapters I mentioned numerous scientific studies that
evaluated one single factor (e.g., vitamin D deficiency, zinc deficiency, omega-3 fatty acid
insufficiency, insulin resistance, chronic stress, and sleep deprivation) in the pathogenesis of
autoimmune disease. In fact, the most commonly studied autoimmune diseases (which tend to be the
most common autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and psoriasis) appear to have dozens of these “single” causes. I
believe that this is because all these possible causes are connected, that they are all a result of the
foods we eat and how we choose to live our lives—and that they are all contributors, each playing its
own part in both the stimulation and the lack of regulation of the immune system.
     This is why the Paleo Approach is a comprehensive method. Rather than addressing a handful of
possible contributors, by, say, going gluten-free or moving to Crete (either of which may be enough
for improvements in some people’s autoimmune diseases), I want to address all the possible
contributors. Well, at least all those that are in your power to control.
     You may also have noticed that the majority of the diet and lifestyle factors discussed in this
book are also risk factors for obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and often even cancer.
That’s great news, because it means that eating and living the Paleo Approach way will improve your
chances of reversing your autoimmune disease as well as preventing other chronic diseases. It
reinforces the idea that this way of eating and living is generally conducive to good health. And it
helps put all the pieces of the puzzle together.
Chapter 3 Review




   Diet cannot work in isolation. Stress management, adequate sleep, protecting circadian rhythms,
   and incorporating mild to moderate physical activity into your life are equally important.




   The master stress hormone is cortisol. Chronic stress leads to chronically elevated or
   dysregulated cortisol. This, in turn, causes cortisol-receptor resistance. Cortisol resistance
   causes immune system dysfunction.




   High cortisol levels increase intestinal permeability (leaky gut).




   Cortisol is one of the important endocrine signals of the body’s circadian clock. Another one is
   melatonin.




   Melatonin plays a very complex regulatory role in the innate and adaptive immune systems,
   decreasing some immune functions while enhancing others. Supporting normal melatonin rhythms
   is important.
Melatonin and the neurotransmitter serotonin are important regulators of digestion.




Adequate sleep is essential for regulating the immune system and to support healing. Healthy
individuals require seven to ten hours of sleep every night; those with autoimmune disease may
require more.




Low- to moderate-intensity physical activity is extremely important for regulating hormones and
modulating the immune system.




Intense or strenuous physical activity causes a leaky gut and dysregulated cortisol. High-intensity
exercise should be avoided.




Eating infrequent large meals (two to four times a day) is better for hunger-hormone regulation
than grazing (eating numerous small meals throughout the day). Intermittent fasting should be
avoided.




Many medications that are commonly prescribed to patients with autoimmune disease may do
more harm than good.




NSAIDs cause increased intestinal permeability and should be avoided.
Drugs that reduce stomach acid—such as PPIs, H2 blockers, and antacids—hinder digestion and
contribute to gut dysbiosis.
Chapter 4
Moving Forward
          “Pharmaceutical treatment has, thus far, failed to inhibit the tsunami of endemic
          diseases spreading around the world, and no new tools are in sight. Dramatic
          alterations, in direction of a paleolithic-like lifestyle and food habits, seem to be the
          only alternatives with the potential to control the present escalating crisis.”
          —STIG BENGMARK, MD, PHD,
          “Gut Microbiota, Immune Development and Function,”Pharmacological Research 69
          (March 2013): 87–113.


Truthfully, diet changes have always been and are still considered alternative- or complementary-
medicine approaches to managing autoimmune diseases. There is still a lot of skepticism within the
medical community about the ability of diet or lifestyle changes to remedy such devastating illnesses.
However, two emerging fields of research are validating nutritional strategies as a means of
managing disease: nutrigenetics and nutrigenomics, which study the interaction of nutrition with gene
and protein expression, respectively.

Studies of nutrition’s impact on the expression of genes (which genes are turned on or off) and the
expression of proteins (which proteins are being made in larger or smaller quantities) account for a
large portion of the scientific citations used to support the tenets of the Paleo Approach. Many dietary
components, including the long-chain omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA abundant in seafood (see
here and here), the antioxidant flavonoids and carotenoids plentiful in plants (see here), and various
dietary vitamins and minerals, have been shown in these studies to ameliorate oxidative stress and to
have a positive impact on gene expression and production of inflammatory mediators (like cytokines).
These studies confirm that nutrition can be a powerful tool for turning on the right genes and getting
cells to build the right proteins. And these nutrigenetics and nutrigenomics studies support not only the
Paleo Approach’s list of foods to remove from your diet but also the lists of foods to incorporate and
prioritize in your diet.

As we move forward into the second part of this book, the focus will shift from what to avoid and
what not to do to what to include and what to do. So if you’re feeling as if all your favorite things are
on the “not to do” list, hang in there. Because:
                     You can eat an enormous variety of delicious, satisfying foods to nurture both
                      your physical and mental health. You will not feel deprived.
                      There are easy ways to adjust your life to prioritize sleep, protect your
                      circadian rhythms, manage stress, and incorporate more activity into your
                      life.
                     You can do this.
                     It’s worth it.
On the Shoulders of Giants

A variety of dietary protocols have been offered to help those in search of alternatives to
pharmaceuticals manage their autoimmune diseases, including:


     gluten-free diets and “true” gluten-free diets (i.e., grain-free diets)
     plant-based diets
     vegetarian diets
     vegan and raw-foods diets
     whole-foods diets
     vegetable-juice fasts
     the Paleo diet
     the Paleo diet autoimmune caveat (or protocol)
     the GAPS (gut and psychology syndrome) diet
     the SCD (specific carbohydrate diet)
     the Weston A. Price Foundation diet
     Dr. Datis Kharrazian’s diet
     the Wahls Paleo diet (the Wahls protocol)
     variations of the above


Rather than focus on the limitations of these approaches, I think it’s important to emphasize the
similarities. These diets all increase nutrient density. Most of them eliminate processed foods and
refined carbohydrates while increasing fiber content. Many of these diets exclude the most
detrimental foods from the perspective of gut health. Some of them are part of larger philosophies that
incorporate stress-management strategies and more active lifestyles. And you may have noticed that
all these protocols are embraced, in small or large part, by the Paleo Approach.
      Many people have found success with these approaches, which probably reflects the fact that
autoimmune disease is very individual and that a wide variety of factors can contribute to it. This
means that certain factors (like correcting micronutrient deficiencies or removing harmful foods from
the diet) make a very big difference for many people. For others, these approaches have not worked,
which probably means that a piece of the puzzle was missing for that individual. This is the reason for
the Paleo Approach: to put all the pieces of the puzzle together to maximize your chances of healing.
The Paleo Approach takes the best of the best—only those ideas from the most successful alternative
diets that are supported by high-quality unbiased scientific research—and presents it in a thoughtful,
comprehensive way. It incorporates all the key aspects of health into one strategy so you don’t have to
cut and paste them together yourself.
      The Paleo Approach builds on the foundation that myriad researchers, medical professionals,
and plain-old intelligent folks interested in nutritional science have laid—in particular on the work of
Loren Cordain, PhD, and Terry Wahls, MD. As mentioned in the preface, my own self-
experimentation with nutritional strategies to mitigate my autoimmune disease started with the Paleo
diet. As I continued to delve into the science behind it, my understanding of the interaction between
nutrition and health expanded. I became more interested in nutrigenetics and nutrigenomics. I came to
grasp the importance of nutrient density, variety, and balance.
      Potential modifications of the Paleo diet for those with autoimmune disease were first alluded to
in Loren Cordain’s first book, The Paleo Diet. Buried in a section titled “Food as Medicine: How
Paleo Diets Improve Health and Well-Being”—which discusses health conditions that are improved
by following a Paleo diet—potatoes, hot chilies and other nightshades, and alcohol are mentioned as
troublesome foods for those with autoimmune disease. But Cordain stresses the absolute necessity of
removing dairy, grains, legumes, and nightshades from the diets of those with autoimmune disease.
      The Paleo diet autoimmune protocol (originally the “autoimmune caveat”) was first presented in
The Paleo Solution, by Robb Wolf, with the simple recommendation that those with autoimmune
disease eliminate eggs, nuts, seeds, tomatoes, potatoes, eggplants, and peppers from their diets. The
Paleo autoimmune protocol has since evolved to restrict more foods and to suggest avoiding NSAIDs
and alcohol. There is not necessarily agreement on which foods to avoid: Dr. Cordain originally
emphasized removing nightshades but also maintained that nuts and seeds should be OK; Dr. Wahls
says it’s fine for most people to eat nightshades but acknowledges that they are a problem for some
people.
      When I first tackled the Paleo diet autoimmune protocol, there wasn’t much information to go on,
some of it was contradictory, and there were very few explanations as to why certain foods might be
a problem for those with autoimmune disease. Fortunately, this has been gradually changing.
      In Cordain’s most recent book, The Paleo Answer, chapter 9 focuses on the connection between
autoimmune disease and food and includes a much more complete list of foods and medications to
avoid. Practical Paleo, by Diane Sanfilippo, offers a more comprehensive list of foods to avoid—as
well as important micronutrients and supplements that may be of help—and is the first Paleo resource
book to present the notion of healing the gut as a way to manage autoimmune disease.
      Terry Wahls made an essential contribution to the Paleo autoimmune protocol by changing the
dialogue from “foods to avoid” to “foods to eat.” The viral YouTube video of her TEDx Iowa City
talk in 2011 emphasizes vegetables, vegetables, vegetables: colorful vegetables for antioxidants
(flavonoids and polyphenols), sulfur-rich vegetables for organosulfur compounds, leafy green
vegetables for vitamins and minerals, and sea plants for iodine. She is keeping the dialogue going by
running clinical trials evaluating various versions of the Wahls Protocol in the management of
multiple sclerosis.
      Most studies that address the effects of nutrient status on autoimmune disease evaluate the use of
supplements on various markers of inflammation or on autoantibody production. Consuming nutrient-
dense whole foods elevates this approach by addressing multiple nutrient deficiencies simultaneously
and providing the nutrients required for proper immune function and optimal gut health. There is
certainly a need for more research, both basic science and clinical trials, to fully understand the role
nutrition plays in autoimmune disease and to come up with more individualized targeted nutrition
therapy. And certainly, as more research is performed, the specific recommendations in The Paleo
Approach may evolve. (Updates can easily be found at ThePaleoMom.com.) But, as you can see from
the hundreds of scientific studies cited in this book (see the References section beginning on see
here), there is enough solid data to support the Paleo Approach right now.
The Paleo Approach Is a Comprehensive Approach

The Paleo Approach is all-embracing: it’s not just about switching out dietary factors that contribute
to autoimmune disease but also about addressing lifestyle choices.
      The recommendations in this book do not in any way preclude working with a health care
professional or using alternative therapies for symptom relief. In fact, working with your doctor is
advised. Whether you choose to consult with your primary care physician, a physician specializing in
a field relevant to your disease, a functional-medicine specialist, an alternative health care provider,
or a combination of these experts, you should be under medical supervision as you embark on your
healing journey. This book cannot possibly appreciate your individual situation the way your doctor
can. Nor can this book predict complications or troubleshoot every possible extenuating
circumstance. Health experts are out there to help you, and developing a relationship with them is the
best way for you to manage your disease.

          “ I will not follow where the path may lead; instead I will go where there is no path and
          leave a trail. ”
          —MURIEL STRODE,
          My Little Book of Prayer




     Alternative and Supplemental Therapies




While the benefits and risks of alternative therapies for symptom relief go beyond the scope of this
book, alternative therapies are in no way prohibited on the Paleo Approach. If you get relief from
physical therapy, acupuncture, massage, chiropractic adjustments, or other therapies, then by all
means continue to include them in your disease-management strategy.
     You may also find working with a mental-health practitioner, such as a psychiatrist or counselor,
to be beneficial. Such professionals can help you address issues that may be preventing you from
managing stress. Emotional stress is a form of chronic stress, which raises cortisol levels and can
cause cortisol resistance. Mental-health practitioners can help you find strategies to cope with the
grief that naturally accompanies an autoimmune disease diagnosis, and also work with you to deal
with emotional eating, attachments to foods, and myriad other issues that may be hindering your
progress. There’s no question that emotional health is important for physical health (and vice versa).
Working with Your Doctor




Even with the hundreds of scientific studies supporting every single concept in this book, many
medical professionals may still grab their prescription pads in their first attempt to treat your disease.
There are many reasons for this. The connection between nutrition and disease is still a very new
field of study, and there is still far more that is unknown than known. And there is far more
misinformation about what constitutes a healthy diet floating around than actual scientific truth.
Besides, most doctors have little to no training in nutrition. Their expertise is in diagnosis and
treatment of disease (typically surgically or pharmaceutically), which is crucial expertise to avail
yourself of, but the problem for those of us with autoimmune disease is that effective, standard
medical treatment options do not exist.
     Does it matter if conventional medicine isn’t working for you? Well, yes, it does, but less so
now that this book is in your hands. You are arming yourself with the knowledge you need to manage
your autoimmune disease—naturally and effectively! Many of you will be able to completely reverse
your autoimmune diseases and discontinue prescription medications completely. Remember that it’s
important to start seeing substantial healing with diet and lifestyle changes before weaning yourself
off medications and to do so under a doctor’s supervision.




     The Benefits of Working with a Functional-Medicine Specialist
Many tests for troubleshooting individual challenges fall under the purview of functional-medicine
specialists. These are doctors or alternative health care providers with supplemental training who
specialize in diagnosing and treating the root causes of disease (like food sensitivities, micronutrient
deficiencies, gut dysbiosis, and leaky gut). Beyond ordering a wider range of tests than many other
health care professionals, functional-medicine specialists often use botanicals and herbal remedies
instead of, or in conjunction with, pharmaceuticals for a more diverse approach to disease
management and prevention. The recommendations presented in this book (like the importance of gut
health and nutrient density) are generally compatible with the philosophies of functional-medicine
specialists.
      Even if pharmaceuticals are your physician’s go-to approach, you are allowed to say, “No, thank
you. I think I’ll try some diet and lifestyle changes first.” Provided your disease is not immediately
life-threatening, the vast majority of physicians will support this type of approach as a first attempt
(even if many of them will be skeptical).
      Although you may not be embarking on this diet-and-lifestyle adventure with your physician’s
tacit approval, it is important to be able to have an open and honest dialogue with your physician.
Your physician is a very intelligent person who has trained for years, if not decades. And he is likely
to have insight into your individual situation that no book (or author) can ever have. (You are sitting
in his office, after all, and I am typing this book on my computer, perhaps thousands of miles away,
having never met you.) You will need his expertise to critically evaluate which medications are
helping you and which can be decreased or discontinued. You may need to discuss conventional
medicine treatments (like antibiotics for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth; see here) or
diagnostics (like testing for parasites) in conjunction with diet and lifestyle changes. Your doctor is a
member of your team, a coconspirator against this thing called autoimmune disease. And you can
work together to beat your disease. Share this book with him. Share this page with him. Share the
ample science supporting this approach. Tell him that you know this isn’t a cure (see here), but that it
is a powerful strategy for regulating the immune system and that it is far, far, far more sustainable than
any pharmaceutical your doctor could ever prescribe. My intention is to highlight the science behind
my nutritional recommendations so that you can engage in a productive dialogue with your doctor. If
you are a doctor reading this book, and perhaps recommending it to your patients, then I have clearly
done my job well!
      And if your doctor just won’t engage with you in a discussion about diet and lifestyle choices to
manage your disease, then it’s OK to find a doctor who will. The following directories are a great
place to start:


     Primal Docs (primaldocs.com)
     Paleo Physicians Network (paleophysiciansnetwork.com)




Testimonial by
Anne Angelone, MS, licensed acupuncturist
     “ After years of getting nowhere with the same old conventional treatments for ankylosing
spondylitis (surgery, steroid injections, and NSAIDs for synovitis in both knees, iritis in both eyes,
and spinal inflammation), I desperately recognized the importance of investigating the triggers of
autoimmunity and treating the root causes. While studying professionally and seeking out the
advice of leaders in the field of integrative medicine, it became clear to me that a “systems
approach” was in order. About twelve years ago, I found a doctor skilled in investigating and
treating the root causes. I then tried both oral and IV antibiotic therapy, specific vitamins,
supplements, prolotherapy, hormone balancing, and gut-dysbiosis eradication with both
botanicals and prescription medication. I was encouraged as my symptoms started to subside and
my body got stronger.
     However, since I still wasn’t at my best, I began to study the impact of nutrition. As I
continued to do research, I began to realize that going gluten-free wasn’t enough. After
recognizing the importance of a no-grain diet for healing the gut and starving the microbes that
set off inflammatory gene expression, I started applying the Paleo Approach protocol. Within a
week, my progress catapulted as I dropped all the irritating foods and added in nourishing broths,
soups, gelatins, and daily green smoothies. I was floored, as this seemed so simple yet profound
and completely blew away the alternatives (steroids, surgery, biologics, gluten-free).
     I now enjoy a pain- and inflammation-free life when I stick to the protocol, get enough sleep,
manage stress, take specific supplements, and get regular exercise. As a licensed acupuncturist for
twenty years, I now apply a systems approach using Traditional Chinese Medicine, functional
medicine, and autoimmune Paleo nutrition for myself and for all those seeking to reverse their
own autoimmune reactions. The powerful equation of applying the autoimmune protocol plus
removing triggers plus balancing hormones plus reducing stress with acupuncture and massage
while regulating my breathing through yoga, swimming, and meditation was what halted my
autoimmune reactions.
     The best part of the Paleo Approach for me is the creativity and community surrounding the
preparation of delicious food. I never feel “deprived,” for I know there will always be something
yummy to eat, and, frankly, I prefer remission to any dessert, which is my biggest motivation for
avoiding triggers and keeping my gut in great shape.”

Anne Angelone, MS, is a licensed acupuncturist and the author of several books, including The
Autoimmune Paleo Breakthrough and The Paleo Autoimmune Protocol.
Time to Jump In with Both Feet


          “ The natural healing force within each of us is the greatest force in getting well.”
          —HIPPOCRATES

After wading through the deep waters of science in the first part of this book, it’s finally time to focus
on what to do. Now that you thoroughly understand why what you eat and how you live is important,
we can talk about which foods promote healing and the healthy functioning of your immune system
and discuss strategies to optimize your lifestyle now and for the future.
      It is human nature to assign blame. Even as I researched topics for this book and thought I had a
pretty solid grasp on the origins of my autoimmune disease, I found myself blaming circumstances and
events in my past. I found myself wishing that I had made different choices at key moments in my life.
However, finding fault does not change the present, nor does it improve the future. I remind myself
that I cannot change the past, but only learn from it. So instead I accentuate the positive and live in the
present. I know it’s not always easy, but I urge you to leave your regrets behind and embrace
optimism. You can heal, starting right now!
      So take a deep breath. You made it. You probably now understand your disease and your
immune system better than you ever thought possible. You now know what you need to change in
order to give your body the opportunity to heal. Know that your body wants to heal and that it will
respond to this opportunity.
      Ready? Let’s jump in!
Chapter 5
The Paleo Approach Diet


          “Leave your drugs in the chemist’s pot if you can heal the patient with food.”
          —HIPPOCRATES


Supplying your body with the appropriate raw materials is what gives it the opportunity to heal. By
avoiding the troublesome foods highlighted in chapter 2 and by prioritizing the positive lifestyle
changes discussed in chapter 3, you will remove key triggers of your autoimmune disease. You will
stop overstimulating your immune system and support the resolution of your inflammation. You will
also encourage the growth of normal gut microflora and the regulation of hormones. Eating is now
about consuming the nutrients to support this healing—foods that provide everything your body needs
to stop attacking itself, repair damaged tissue, and get healthy again: proteins, carbohydrates, and fats
to sustain a normal metabolism, build new tissue, and produce hormones, important proteins, and
signaling molecules; and the full range of fat-soluble vitamins, water-soluble vitamins, minerals, and
antioxidants to get rid of inflammation, regulate the immune system, and support the normal
functioning of all the body’s systems.

Healing is complex. You are not only trying to heal the tissues attacked by your autoimmune disease;
you are also trying to restore the barrier function of your gut (that is, fix your leaky gut) and
reestablish a normal gut microflora. Your body will need extra nutrition (and sleep, which is
discussed in the next chapter) to get started on this process, so the more nutrient-dense your diet is,
the better. By eating according to the Paleo Approach, you will flood your body with the nutrients it
needs.

Because the damage to your gut is very likely affecting your body’s ability to absorb nutrients from
your food, nutrient density is even more paramount. As your gut heals, your ability to absorb and use
the nutrients from your food will increase, and so will your body’s rate of healing. Sleep, stress
management, physical activity, and supporting your circadian rhythms will also speed up healing.
Supporting digestion is also important (see here and here): supplements may be extremely beneficial,
at least initially, and they are discussed in chapter 8.
                     Animal-based and plant-based foods are equally important to include in your diet.

So which foods can you eat to promote healing? Meat, seafood, vegetables, fruit, and healthy fats. The
higher the quality, the better. The greater the variety, the better. In general, whole foods, which means
unprocessed, unmanipulated ingredients or food in its most natural state. You still get to cook these
foods and add seasonings to make delicious meals. And you get to include fats from quality animal
sources and natural expeller-pressed vegetable and fruit oils (cold-pressed, meaning that when you
squeeze the fruit, such as an olive, oil comes out).

In this chapter I will spell out your best food options, including which foods are the most nutrient-
dense and which foods should be eaten in moderation. I’ll also throw in a little science so you can
make the best food choices for yourself.
Meat, Poultry, and Seafood

Animal foods—red meat, poultry, offal, and seafood—are your best source of easily digested
complete proteins and an important source of fats. Furthermore, animal foods are loaded with
vitamins and minerals, some of which are just not available in plant foods.
     Although red meat has been vilified as a source of saturated fat, you now know that eating fat is
important, especially the vitamin-rich fat from quality animal sources (see here), which means that
red meat is back on the menu! It is high in protein, is a complete protein (meaning that it contains all
twenty amino acids), and is an excellent source of minerals and vitamins, including iron, zinc,
selenium, copper, potassium, phosphorus, magnesium, manganese, calcium, all the B vitamins
(especially B12), and the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K.




What Is an Amino Acid Score?
This score reflects the presence of the essential amino acids in a food. When all the essential amino
acids are available in a food in appropriate relative quantities, the amino acid score is high (with any
score over 100 denoting a high-quality protein). This score does not reflect the digestibility of
protein. (Animal proteins are far more digestible than plant proteins, and seafood proteins are the
most digestible.) Nor does this score take into account the completeness of a protein (whether the
nonessential amino acids are present in a food), although all animal sources are complete proteins.
The amino acid score as well as a breakdown of the amino acid content of Paleo Approach foods can
be found in the nutrient tables on see here



Red meat doesn’t mean just beef. While your neighborhood grocery store may carry only beef, pork,
and lamb, there is a great variety of outstanding sources of nutrient-dense meat (red, but also white
and game). These include all livestock animals and wild game (basically all mammals), such as:


     antelope
     bear
     beaver
     buffalo (bison)
     boar
     camel
     caribou
     cattle (beef, veal)
     deer (venison)
     elk
     goat
     hare
    horse
    kangaroo
    moose
    pig (pork)
    rabbit
    seal
    sea lion
    sheep (lamb, mutton)
    whale*


*Some species of whale may have high mercury content (see here).




      Certainly not everyone has access to this variety of meat, especially when it comes to wild
game, nor will everyone enjoy the flavor of all these types of meat. That’s OK. You just want to
include as much variety as possible (depending on availability, affordability, and personal
preference) and source the highest-quality meat your budget allows.
      Some birds are also often included in the red meat category owing to the high iron content of
their meat, but I consider them poultry. Poultry is another great source of protein, vitamins, and
minerals, including selenium, potassium, phosphorus, iron, magnesium, manganese, calcium, copper,
B vitamins, and the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K.



Poultry includes a variety of farmed birds and wild game, such as:


    chicken
    dove
    duck
    emu
     goose
     grouse
     guinea hen
     ostrich
     partridge
     pigeon
     pheasant
     quail
     turkey




     Again, not everyone will have access to all these. And again, that’s OK. The key is variety (and
also quality).




Can You Heal from Autoimmune Disease and Be Vegetarian or
Vegan?
I don’t believe that you can get adequate nutrition to reverse autoimmune disease without eating
animal foods. In particular, the lack of fat-soluble vitamins, vitamin B12, and complete proteins
present in vegetarian and vegan diets provides a major, and probably insurmountable, obstacle to
reducing inflammation and excessive immune system activation. Pescetarianism (a vegetarian diet that
includes seafood), on the other hand, is compatible with healing from autoimmune disease.
     Reptiles and amphibians are readily available in some places. They are also a good source of
protein, minerals, and vitamins, including iron, phosphorus, selenium, potassium, copper, vitamin A,
vitamin E, and B vitamins.



Common varieties of reptile and amphibian include:
     crocodile
     frog
     snake
     turtle




      Insects are another source of protein, minerals, and vitamins, but you don’t need to eat them to be
healthy—I’m just making sure that you are aware of all your options!
      It is extremely important to include seafood in your diet (provided you’re not allergic). The
protein in fish and shellfish is very easy to digest (easier than that in birds and mammals), and
research shows that the amino acids in fish are more bioavailable (you can absorb and use them more
readily) than those in beef, pork, or chicken. If you have digestive issues, as might occur in celiac
disease, inflammatory bowel disease, or autoimmune diseases affecting the gallbladder, liver, and
pancreas, getting protein predominantly from seafood sources is a good option.
      Fish and shellfish are also the richest dietary sources of the long-chain omega-3 fatty acids DHA
and EPA (see here and here). Especially if grass-fed, pastured meat is beyond your budget (see here),
eating fish at least three times a week is essential for balancing your ratio of omega-6 to omega-3
fatty acids.
      Fish also contains a wide range of minerals and vitamins, including calcium, phosphorus, the fat-
soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, vitamin B12, iron, zinc, magnesium, and potassium. Fish is a
particularly good source of two very important minerals that can be challenging to get in sufficient
quantities from other foods: iodine and selenium. The fresh fish you have access to will vary
depending on your location and the time of year. Frozen fish and canned fish (in BPA-free cans) are
also excellent options.



There is a vast variety of edible fish, including:


     anchovy
Arctic char
Atlantic croaker
barcheek goby
bass
bonito
bream*
brill
brisling
carp
catfish
cod
conger
common dab
crappie
croaker
drum
eel
fera
filefish
gar
haddock
hake
halibut
herring
John Dory
king mackerel*
lamprey
ling
loach
marlin*
mackerel
mahi-mahi
milkfish
minnow
monkfish
mullet*
pandora
perch
plaice
pollock
sailfish*
salmon
sardine
shad
shark*
     sheepshead
     silverside
     smelt
     snakehead
     snapper
     sole
     swordfish*
     tarpin*
     tilapia
     tilefish*
     trout
     tub gurnard
     tuna
     turbot
     walleye
     whiting


*May have high mercury content (see here).




     Fish eggs (also known as roe or caviar) are extremely nutrient-dense (check ingredients since
many have dyes and preservatives added). Shellfish is important to include in your diet as well, since
it provides extremely dense sources of zinc, copper, selenium, magnesium, potassium, and
phosphorus as well as the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K and B vitamins (especially B12).
Shellfish is an important source of betaine (also known as trimethylglycine or glycine betaine), which
is an essential nutrient for supporting the methyl cycle (see here) and improving liver function and
serotonin production (see here).



Shellfish possibilities include:
    abalone
    clams
    cockles
    conch
    crab
    crawfish
    cuttlefish
    limpets
    lobster
    mussels
    octopus
    oysters
    scallops
    shrimp
    snails
    squid
    periwinkles
    whelks




A few other sea creatures that you might enjoy eating include:


    anemone
    jellyfish
    sea cucumber
    sea squirt
    sea urchin
    starfish
Quality Matters

Grass-fed meat comes from herbivorous animals, specifically ruminants like cattle, bison, sheep,
goats, deer, and antelope, which are raised on grass, meaning that the only food they eat is grass and
some broad-leaf plants. Ideally, the animals should be raised on pasture and eat fresh grass. The
animals are usually not given antibiotics or hormones. Some farms must give their animals dried grass
in the winter months, depending on the location and climate of the farm. (Some farmers will not
butcher in the winter because the quality of the meat of animals consuming dried grass is lower.)
Many farms are conscientious about keeping their pastures and any supplemental feed organic. It is
not surprising that ruminants are healthiest when they eat the foods their bodies were cleverly
designed to digest—grass and some broad-leafed plants. Grass-fed animals are also free-roaming,
meaning that, within the confines of a fenced pasture, they are not restricted in their movement or
activities (which is a healthier way for animals to live).
      Pasture-raised meat comes from omnivorous animals, such as pigs, boar, and most species of
bird, which are raised on pasture and allowed to roam freely. The diets of these animals are often
(but not always) supplemented with grains, seeds, soy, table scraps, or farm surplus (for example,
fruits and vegetables left over from the harvest). The supplemental diet may or may not be organic
and non-GMO (see here). These animals are also typically not given antibiotics or hormones. The
terms grass-fed and pasture-raised are often used interchangeably, but they don’t mean the same
thing. Grass-fed implies pasture-raised but not necessarily the other way around—a cow can be
raised on pasture but still fed grain and therefore be pasture-raised but not grass-fed. Because
omnivorous animals typically don’t thrive without some supplemental feed, pasture-raised is as good
as it gets. So look for grass-fed beef, bison, and lamb, but look for pasture-raised pork, chicken, and
turkey.
      There are many excellent reasons to choose grass-fed or pastured-raised meat over conventional
(grain-fed) meat. From an animal-welfare standpoint, grass-fed and pasture-raised animals are better
treated, happier, and healthier. The E. coli contamination of grass-fed meat is extremely low
compared with conventional meat (in large part because pastured cows have healthy intestines!),
despite the fact that, while antibiotic use is routine in factory-farming operations (called concentrated
animal feeding operations or CAFOs), antibiotics and hormones are not used at all in grass-fed
animals. (Recall that meat from animals given hormones is a source of environmental estrogens; see
here.) From an environmental-impact standpoint, eating grass-fed or pasture-raised meat means
supporting smaller (often local, family-owned) farms and thereby reducing fuel costs to get the meat
to you. And keeping grains out of your personal food chain means not supporting large industrial
farms, whose operations degrade the topsoil and leach fertilizers and pesticides into our rivers, lakes,
and oceans.
     Meat from grass-fed and pasture-raised animals tends to be more nutrient-dense than
conventional meat. Although the exact nutrient content will vary from species to species and from
farm to farm (and by time of year and the quality of supplemental feed, if any), grass-fed and pasture-
raised meat tends to be higher (sometimes much higher) in many minerals and vitamins while also
having a better omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio. For example, grass-fed beef contains up to ten
times more beta-carotene (a carotenoid—that is, an antioxidant and precursor of vitamin A; see here)
as grain-fed beef and up to four times more vitamin E (see here). Grass-fed beef is also higher in B
vitamins, zinc, iron, phosphorus, and potassium. And because pasture-raised animals hang out in the
sun, their fat is a source of vitamin D (which is practically nonexistent in factory-farmed animals).
Free-range chickens also have more vitamin E content and iron than conventional chickens.
     Grass-fed and pasture-raised meat tends to have a much lower water content than conventional
meat and is much leaner overall (which means it has more protein!). Plus, its fats are much healthier.
Grass-fed meat contains approximately four times more omega-3 fatty acids (in the very useful DHA
and EPA forms; see here) as compared with grain-fed meat. It also contains far fewer omega-6 fatty
acids, so the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids in grass-fed meat is typically within the optimal
range at 3:1 (but can be as low as 4:1 and as high as 20:1 in grain-fed meat, varying by the exact diet
of the cow but also the cut of meat). Meat (and dairy) from grass-fed cows is the best-known source
of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA; see here). Grass-fed and pasture-raised meat also tends to be
higher in oleic acid (see here).




                                     What About Bacon?




Not all processed or cured meats are bad for you. If you can get naturally cured or uncured deli meats
from grass-fed or pasture-raised animals, there is no reason you can’t eat it. These meats are typically
cured the old-fashioned way (with just salt, sugar, and smoke). They may or may not be labeled
nitrite- or nitrate-free. (The dominant source of nitrates in your diet is actually vegetables, so there is
no good reason to worry about ingredients such as celery salt, beet powder, or even sodium nitrate in
cured meats.) And although sugar is usually used in the curing process, very little remains in the
finished product, so it’s not a concern. So, yes, you get to eat bacon, ham, and other smoked meats,
but remember that these tend to be the fattiest meats around, so make sure that they come from grass-
fed or pasture-raised sources. Also be cautious with sausages and similar deli meats. Even if they are
made with quality meats, nightshades and seeds are often used in the seasoning.



     Interestingly, meat from grass-fed and pasture-raised animals is also less subject to oxidation in
processing and storage than conventional meat. This reflects (at least in part) a higher concentration
of antioxidants (like vitamin E and beta-carotene) in the meat and fat. This means less discoloration,
longer storage life, and better flavor. In fact, a number of studies have investigated enriched diets for
factory-farmed animals to mimic this property of grass-fed and pasture-raised meat.
     Note that grass-fed implies grass-finished (meaning that the animals live on grass for the
entirety of their lives), but some farmers do “grain-finish” their animals (most frequently cattle).
Unfortunately, grain-finishing undermines many of the health benefits of grass-fed meat: the desirable
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio in grass-fed animals can be completely reversed in as little as a
month of their being on a grain-based diet.




The Semantics of Grass-Fed




If an animal is grass-fed, it has eaten only grass for its entire life (also referred to as “grass-
finished”). Some producers “grain-finish” their meat to bulk up the animal and increase the marbling
of the meat (which completely skews the balance of omega-6 to omega-3 fats). Unfortunately, some
producers can be somewhat cagey about this, so asking direct questions may be required. Also note
that organic meat is not the same as grass-fed. (Although grass-fed is typically organic, the opposite is
not necessarily true.) Some producers supplement with grain, so the animals are “mostly grass-fed,”
which is an improvement over conventional meat, but how much of an improvement is hard to
quantify. So whether you are buying from a local farmer, online, or from your butcher, if you aren’t
familiar with the producer, ask about what the animals actually ate (for their entire lives) and whether
or not they were kept on pasture.



    When it comes to pasture-raised animals—generally pigs, boar, and birds—you should ask your
farmer what the animals’ diets are supplemented with. Some people with extreme sensitivities to corn
and soy report that they cannot eat the flesh of animals fed corn- or soy-based feed (although there is
no evidence that intact soy or corn proteins are incorporated into the tissues of animals; this may
simply reflect a cross-contamination issue). It is not necessary for most people to avoid animals given
supplemental feed, but shopping around for the best-quality pasture-raised meat you can find is still
advisable.
      Poultry in general has the worst omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio of all the protein sources on
the Paleo Approach. Even free-range poultry does not necessarily have a better omega-6 to omega-3
ratio. One study of chicken raised predominantly on grasshoppers showed chickens with an omega-6
to omega-3 fatty acid ratio of approximately 7:1 (although this is still a vast improvement over
conventional chicken). By contrast, studies of chickens supplemented with large amounts of flaxseed
were able to achieve a 1:1 ratio of omega-6s to omega-3s (although a high percentage was ALA as
opposed to DHA and EPA; see here). Generally, however, poultry is naturally higher in omega-6 fatty
acids. This doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t eat poultry, because it definitely has nutritional merit.
However, it does mean that poultry, even pasture-raised, should not be the main source of protein in
your diet. Especially if you eat any conventional poultry, you should make sure to consume plenty of
seafood to balance your omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid intake.

Seafood: Wild versus Farmed

In terms of nutrient density, the difference between wild-caught fish and farmed fish is not as great as
the difference between grass-fed or pasture-raised animals and factory-farmed animals. Farmed
salmon is still an excellent source of DHA and EPA omega-3 fatty acids (and typically more
affordable, too, although check the ingredients to make sure that no food dyes are added).




What If You Are Allergic to Fish or Shellfish or Just Don’t Like It?
If you’re allergic to fish or shellfish, don’t eat it. However, since fish is the best food source of DHA
and EPA omega-3 fatty acids, it will be even more important to source quality animal products to
consume a good ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids. While algae supplements do contain
appreciable amounts of DHA, they may also stimulate the immune system, so extreme caution is
recommended (see here). The best nonfish source of omega-3 fatty acids is brains (see here).
     If you simply don’t like fish or you observe religious restrictions against eating shellfish, for
instance, you may be wondering if you can just get your DHA and EPA from fish oil supplements.
Polyunsaturated fats are very easily oxidized when exposed to heat or light and are not very shelf-
stable—especially once the fats are isolated from the whole food. Consuming oxidized omega-3 fats
contributes to inflammation instead of reducing it. It is therefore extremely important to source a high-
quality fish oil that has been properly manufactured, shipped, and stored (including by the store where
you buy it). It would be far preferable for you to try some new kinds of seafood or new recipes before
resorting to fish oil. Eating fresh, frozen, or canned whole fish protects the omega-3 fats from
oxidation and provides all the necessary cofactors for optimal absorption and use by the body.




     Which fish are the best sources of DHA and EPA? A 3.5-ounce serving of wild-caught salmon
(fresh or canned, any species), sardines, albacore tuna, trout, or mackerel has more than 500
milligrams of DHA plus EPA. Seafood with moderate amounts of DHA and EPA (150–500
milligrams per 3.5-ounce serving) include haddock, cod, hake, halibut, shrimp, sole, flounder, perch,
bass, oysters, crab, and farmed salmon. Because the omega-6 content of fish is typically so low, this
translates to an omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio of anywhere between 1:10 and 1:250!




“Wait! Doesn’t Fish Contain Mercury?”
We are often warned not to consume too much seafood for fear of mercury poisoning. Mercury is
present in all foods. Concentrations are quite low in fruits and vegetables because mercury uptake by
plants from soil is low. By contrast, mercury levels can be quite high in certain types of fish because
fish absorb mercury from the water and from the organisms they consume. Methylmercury, an organic
form of mercury, is the predominant form of mercury in fish. It is concentrated in the muscle, and
because it binds so tightly to certain proteins in fish, it accumulates over time. Fish at the lower end
of the food chain tend to contain very low levels of methylmercury, but fish that eat other fish tend to
have a higher concentration (a process called biomagnification).
      The concern over ingesting methylmercury is that almost all of it crosses the gut barrier and
enters the bloodstream, so it can be found in every tissue in the body. (Elemental, or inorganic, forms
of mercury are not easily absorbed, and a good amount of the methylmercury you consume is
converted into elemental forms by your healthy gut microflora.) Methylmercury also readily crosses
both the blood-brain barrier and the placenta. High levels are known to cause damage to the central
and peripheral nervous systems.




The expression “mad as a hatter” comes from hatmakers in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries eventually going crazy from chronic mercury exposure because the chemical was used in
felt production.


However, the mercury content of most seafood is not a cause for concern because of the high selenium
content of these foods. As discussed in chapter 2, selenium is required for the activity of many
enzymes with vital antioxidant roles, including protecting the brain and nervous tissue from oxidative
damage. Methylmercury irreversibly binds to selenium, which is how methylmercury is believed to
damage the brain and nervous system: it prevents selenoenzymes from protecting these tissues from
oxidants. However, most of the ocean fish that we eat contains much more selenium than
methylmercury. This is good for the fish (they don’t die from mercury exposure) and even better for
us. Selenium-bound methylmercury is not efficiently absorbed by our bodies. And because the
methylmercury that is absorbed is already bound to selenium, it can’t interfere with our
selenoenzymes. The only fish that need to be avoided are those that contain more methylmercury than
selenium.
     Fish that tend to contain very low levels of methylmercury include shellfish, salmon, trout,
herring, haddock, pollock (Boston bluefish), sole, flounder, Atlantic mackerel, and lake whitefish.
However, all fish that contain more selenium than methylmercury are perfectly safe, which includes
the vast majority of ocean fish and approximately 97 percent of freshwater fish. The only fish you
need to avoid are pilot whale (and perhaps other carnivorous whales), blue shark, cat shark, mako
shark (and perhaps other shark species), guilt-head bream, red mullet, and swordfish. Tarpin, marlin,
king mackerel, sailfish, and tilefish are known to have high mercury levels, but their selenium levels
have not yet been measured, so it would be safer to avoid these as well. This information is based on
various small-scale studies. The Environmental Protection Agency is currently undertaking a
comprehensive survey of freshwater and saltwater fish and assigning what is called a selenium health
benefit value to each type of fish, which essentially indicates the ratio of selenium to methylmercury
in each fish. The results of the project should be available shortly. (Updates on which fish to avoid,
or not, will be available at ThePaleoMom.com.) In the meantime, a list of selenium health benefit
values that have already been measured can be found here.
     There are two other pollutants—dioxins and PCBs—that may be of concern because of their
carcinogenic properties. In general, fish is much lower in these pollutants than other foods (including
beef, chicken, pork, dairy products, and vegetables). Depending on the waters, wild-caught fish is
typically lower in dioxins and PCBs than farmed fish, but even in the case of farmed fish, the health
benefits of eating fish far outweigh the risks, especially in the context of the importance of DHA and
EPA fats in managing autoimmune disease.
     Only a handful of fish species (notably freshwater bass, farmed tilapia, farmed catfish, and
farmed Atlantic sardines) have a higher ratio of omega-6 fatty acids to omega-3s. While much worse
than other seafood, these fish have an omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio between 2:1 and 3:1, which
is actually a good ratio for your overall diet. So eating them doesn’t help balance excess omega-6s
from other sources (like conventional meat or poultry), but they are still absolutely appropriate to eat
and enjoy.

Offal

Eating every part of the animal makes ecological and health sense. Ecologically, making use of every
part of the animal means that nothing goes to waste, and it removes incentives for meat manufacturers
to create new breeds of animals to cater to specific markets. For example, Cornish X chickens are
bred to grow quickly and have huge breasts to meet the demand for white-meat chicken, but at the cost
of their own health: their legs break from having to support their massive breasts, and they suffer
organ failure as a result of their fast growth rate. In terms of health, eating every part of the animal
ensures a much more nutrient-dense diet and provides key amino acids that may be in short supply if
you are overly reliant on muscle meat for protein. In fact, organs (which often go to waste or are sold
to other countries) are the most nutrient-dense parts of the animal. All of us should include organ meat
in our diet, but especially those of us with autoimmune disease.
      Offal generally refers to the edible parts of an animal other than the muscle meat we are used to
eating. Also called edible by-products, offal includes both organ meat (sometimes called variety
meats) as well as unusual cuts of meat—cheek, tongue, fat trimmings, blood, and certain bones. All
these meats are good for you. In fact, organ meats are the most concentrated source of just about every
nutrient, including the vitamins and minerals that are frequently lacking in those with autoimmune
disease (see here).



Offal includes:


     blood
     bones (marrow bones, ground bones, and bones used to make broth)
     brain
     chitterlings and intestines (used to make natural casings)
     fats and other trimmings (tallow and lard)
     fries (testicles)
     head meat (used to make head cheese or cuts like cheek)
     heart
     kidneys
     lips
     liver
     melt (spleen)
     rinds (skin)
     sweetbreads (thymus and pancreas)
     tail
     tongue
     tripe (stomach)




                                            Illustration by Rob Foster


      Liver is one of the most concentrated food sources of vitamin A. In addition to containing dozens
of important vitamins and minerals, it is an outstanding source of vitamin D, vitamin B12, copper,
potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, manganese, and iron, which is in a form that is particularly easily
absorbed and used by the body. Kidneys are particularly high in vitamin B12, selenium, iron, copper,
phosphorus, and zinc. Heart is a concentrated source of the vitaminlike nutrient coenzyme Q10, which
is a potent antioxidant, promotes cardiovascular health, and is even being investigated for cancer
therapy. Supplementation with CoQ10 has been shown to benefit people with rheumatoid arthritis.
(Heart contains approximately two hundred times as much CoQ10 as muscle meat, but liver and
kidneys are also loaded with CoQ10.) Heart also contains an abundance of vitamin A, vitamin B12,
folate, iron, selenium, phosphorus, and zinc and is the number one food source of copper.
      Offal tends to have different relative proportions of the twenty amino acids compared with
muscle meats—and this is a good thing. Offal can supply an abundance of some amino acids that
aren’t found in muscle meats in sufficient quantities for optimal health. For example, organ meats are
among the best sources of tryptophan, the amino acid precursor for serotonin and melatonin, while
having less of the amino acids that compete for transport across the blood-brain barrier (see here).
(This is true of seafood as well.) All offal also tends to be higher in collagen and elastin than regular
muscle meat. For example, heart has twice as much collagen and elastin as skeletal muscle. Offal that
is mostly connective tissue or cartilage, like trotters or skin, is also a great source of collagen and
elastin. This means that organs are very high in glycine, which is a crucial amino acid for tissue
repair, connective-tissue health, joint health, and digestive health.
Getting Used to “Weird’’ Foods




                                            Illustration by Rob Foster


I know that not everyone is adventurous when it comes to food. The thought of eating some of the
foods mentioned in this chapter may make you feel uncomfortable or even repulsed. Don’t worry. You
don’t need to eat every food listed. If you don’t like oysters, no big deal. If you just can’t wrap your
head around the idea of eating tongue, no worries. However, I urge you to, as best you can, ignore
your preconceived notions of what something will taste like or that something is “gross.” I encourage
you to try new foods, to try old foods you didn’t like, and to try old and new foods prepared in fresh
ways. Having a sense of adventure when it comes to food can be fun, liberating, and truly delicious,
especially when you know that that new delicious food will help your body heal! And as you journey
deeper into better health, your taste buds will adapt. A dish that was once unpalatable may become
your new favorite (or will at least be tolerable). Your taste buds constantly turn over, just as all the
cells in your body do, so as you change foods, your ability to enjoy them changes and improves as
well. So six months down the road, you may like something you don’t like now. Try keeping an open
mind when it comes to food.
      Promise yourself that you’ll try everything twice. The new flavor or texture of a food may be off-
putting the first time. The second time you try something, when you have a better idea of what to
expect, you may be able to get past the strangeness and enjoy it more. And experiment with different
preparations. You may not like liver as a pâté or fried with onions, but you might like it mixed with
ground meats and incorporated into homemade breakfast sausage, meatballs, meatloaf, or even
hamburger patties (served on lettuce instead of a bun). You might also find that beef liver or pork
liver is too strong but that lamb or bison liver is to your liking (my preferences, anyway). Heart meat
is particularly good when ground and used in place of ground beef. There’s nothing wrong with
hiding organ meat in your meals even for the grown-ups at the table.



     How much offal should you eat? Generally, the more the better. It is a rule of thumb to eat organ
meat in a ratio to muscle meat that’s similar to the animal’s own ratio of organ meat to muscle meat.
Of course, this rule is often used to rationalize not eating much organ meat (“An animal has one only
liver after all!”). But a large percentage of what is edible on an animal is actually organ meat—and
when you include unusual cuts like cheek, tongue, and trotters, it’s even higher. And just for
reference: A typical beef liver weighs twelve pounds!
     Let’s do a little math. Approximately 54 percent of an industrially produced steer and 58 percent
of an industrially produced hog is considered edible. (The remaining percentage includes parts that
are used in other ways or discarded, such as the hide and bones.) This edible portion includes the
edible by-products (or offal) and the muscle meat, which is sold as cuts of meat and ground meat or
processed into deli meats and sausages. Typically, offal accounts for approximately 12 percent of the
liveweight of cattle and 14 percent of the liveweight of hogs (when pork rinds are included as offal
and not discarded). Converting this to a ratio, you get:


     22 percent of the edible portion of cattle is offal.
     24 percent of the edible portion of hog is offal.


      How representative are these percentages? Well, grass-fed and pastured pork are leaner, so the
percentage of organ meat to muscle meat is slightly higher. But even in wild game, such as elk and
mule deer, the percentage of body weight that is organ meat versus muscle meat is fairly consistent.
There may be a percentage point or two difference one way or the other, but the bottom line is the
same.
      What’s the bottom line? About one-fifth to one-quarter of the meat you eat should be offal (i.e.,
not steak and burgers!). If you eat fish several times a week and meat the rest of the time (and you eat
three meals a day), this translates to about four meals of offal per week. This does not mean you have
to eat liver four times a week (although you can if you want to). The liver weighs up to 2 percent of
the liveweight of a cow (or deer), which translates to eating liver about once every other week. Your
other offal meals should include as much variety of other organs and unusual cuts as possible.
      Four meals a week of offal is the minimum you should consume, for two reasons. First, studies
of modern hunter-gatherers show a great preference for organ meat. Often the muscle is given to dogs
or even thrown away in times of plenty. Some of the healthiest hunter-gatherer populations are those
that eat predominantly organ meat. Second, eating organ meat is one of the most expedient ways to
address micronutrient deficiencies, which go hand in hand with autoimmune disease.
      Is there a limit to how much offal you should consume? I don’t recommend eating liver three
times a day, seven days a week—variety in types of offal is just as important as variety in the animal
it comes from—but eating substantial amounts of offal is safe. As mentioned on see here, whole foods
tend to provide complete nutrition in appropriate ratios to avoid toxicity. If you are consuming a
variety of offal, vitamin or mineral toxicity will be highly unlikely, even if you eat more offal than
muscle meat. However, you should exercise more caution if you are taking supplements to address
specific micronutrient deficiencies. In that case, regular testing will help determine whether offal
consumption is too high (which means that there is no longer a need for supplementation).
      If you don’t like the taste of organ meat, you can easily camouflage it by grinding it up with a
food processor or meat grinder and adding it to ground beef, lamb, or pork in your staple dishes.
Another way to get organ meat into your diet is to cut up pill-size pieces of liver (or other organ
meat) and freeze it: you can then take a palmful of “liver pills” with water on a daily or near-daily
basis. Fermented cod liver oil is a whole food–based supplement option. (Regular cod liver oil or
other fish liver oils, such as skate liver oil, are also good as long as they are cold-pressed and
unrefined, because refinement strips away the vitamins.) This provides only the fat-soluble vitamins
and a subset of other micronutrients available in the whole liver, though, and cannot replace the
benefits of eating a variety of offal.
     Including organ meat and other offal in your diet a few times a week at the bare minimum is
essential for supporting healing and overall health. And while enjoying the foods you eat is great for
quality of life and emotional well-being, it is important to include organ meat in your diet whether
you like it or not. But don’t despair—even if eating offal requires effort for you now, you will
probably find that you’ll grow to like it.




Doesn’t the Liver Filter Toxins?
Many people may be avoiding liver because they mistakenly believe that, because it filters toxins
from the blood, a great many toxins must be present in the organ itself and consumed when you eat it.
This is not true. The liver does filter the blood and removes a great many toxins from the body, but it
does not store those toxins. The liver’s operation is much more complicated than the word filter
implies. The liver actually uses a variety of chemical reactions, controlled by enzymes, to bind
toxins, thereby rendering them inert, and then typically shuttles them to the kidneys for excretion in the
urine but also to the gallbladder for secretion into the gastrointestinal tract and excretion in the stool.
While there may be some toxins present in liver from grain-fed, nonorganic, antibiotic-treated
animals raised in CAFOs (concentrated animal feeding operations, or factory farms), those toxins are
also present in the fat and muscle from those animals to a very similar degree as in the organs. (Some
reports suggest that even more heavy metals sequester in muscle than in organs.) And perhaps most
important, organ meat is full of the vitamins and minerals needed to support your liver’s efforts to
filter toxins in your body. Even when eating conventional organ meat, you gain far more from those
vitamins and minerals than you lose by consuming the small amounts of toxins that may be present. If
you can afford pastured and grass-fed meat, it is clearly superior, but even if you can’t, you have
much to gain from eating organ meat and much to lose from avoiding it.




Glycine Supplementation
For those with autoimmune diseases affecting joints, skin, or connective tissues, dietary glycine is
especially important because it is necessary for repairing those tissues. You may wish to consider
adding a glycine-rich supplement, either gelatin or collagen, in addition to increasing your
consumption of whole-food sources of glycine. Both gelatin and collagen powders can be easily
added to water or other beverages or incorporated into foods.



     Glycine is required for synthesis of DNA, RNA, and many proteins. As such, it plays extensive
roles in digestive health, proper functioning of the nervous system, and wound healing. Glycine aids
digestion by helping to regulate the synthesis of bile salts and the secretion of gastric acid. It is
involved in detoxification and is required for producing glutathione, an essential antioxidant (see here
and here). Glycine helps regulate blood-sugar levels by controlling gluconeogenesis (the manufacture
of glucose from proteins and fats in the liver). Glycine also enhances muscle repair and growth by
increasing creatine levels and regulating the secretion of growth hormone from the pituitary gland
(see here). This multitasking amino acid is also critical for healthy functioning of the central nervous
system. In the brain, it inhibits excitatory neurotransmitters, thus producing a calming effect. Glycine
is also converted into the neurotransmitter serine, which promotes mental alertness, improves
memory, boosts mood, and reduces stress.
     If you aren’t already sold on incorporating glycine-rich foods into your diet, you might be
interested to know that glycine is known to regulate both the innate and adaptive immune systems.
Most important, glycine inhibits macrophage activation by both control of chloride ion flux across the
cell membrane and control of calcium mobilization within the cell. This means that without adequate
glycine, the immune system is more easily activated. The immunomodulatory role of glycine has been
most rigorously studied in the resident macrophages of the liver, which are called Kupffer cells, but
glycine also appears to inhibit activation of several other types of immune cells, including other
tissue macrophages, neutrophils, T cells, and monocytes. Animal experiments have shown dietary
glycine to be protective in various models of inflammation.




Bone Broth and Heavy Metals




Many people may be avoiding broth due to concerns over the fact that bones sequester heavy metals.
Heavy metals bind to appetite, the primary mineral component of bones and teeth, so bones act as
storage for heavy metals that animals may be exposed to in their environment or feed that are not
filtered by the liver and excreted. A recent study extended this fear of heavy metal exposure to
organic broth when it showed that lead in organic chicken bones was released into broth made from
them. But you needn’t worry. The lead levels were about two-thirds of what the Environmental
Protection Agency has established as a safe threshold for drinking water. (Tap water can contain a
maximum of 15 micrograms of lead per liter; the broth with the highest lead content contained 9.5
micrograms per liter.) Many nutrients, all found in the foods on the Paleo Approach protocol, protect
against lead toxicity, including calcium, iron, vitamin D, vitamin C, and vitamin B1.
      The benefits of bone broth still greatly outweigh any heavy-metal risks that might be associated
with it.
      If heavy-metal contaminants still concern you, you can minimize the lead (and other heavy
metals) in your broth by buying only 100 percent pastured chickens from small-scale farms in
nonindustrialized areas (local if possible) and making your own broth with filtered water. There are
currently no scientific studies evaluating the heavy-metal sequestration in the bones of cows, lambs,
or pigs and how that might affect broth made from their bones; however, the same rule of thumb
applies: buy from only 100 percent grass-fed and pastured meat or bones from small-scale farms in
nonindustrialized areas.



      As already mentioned, offal is a good source of glycine because it tends to have a lot of the
connective-tissue proteins collagen and elastin. Any animal part that has more connective tissue is
also higher in glycine, including skin, joints (trotters, duck feet, chicken wings, etc.), and any meat
that you eat off the bone, as well as cheek, jowl, chuck roasts, and bone broth. Gelatin is typically
rendered from beef or pork skin and is an excellent source of glycine. Collagen supplements are
another option (see here).
      Bone broth (or stock) is an especially nutrient-dense food to include in your diet. This flavorful
elixir is made by boiling the bones (and joints, ligaments, etc.) of just about any vertebrate you can
think of (typically poultry, beef, bison, lamb, pork, or fish) in water for anywhere from four hours to
four days! You can add vegetables and herbs for flavor (typically carrots, onion, celery, and garlic).
The bones from mammals ideally should be sawed open (to release the marrow into the broth), but
fowl and fish bones don’t. When the broth is ready, the bones and vegetables are strained out and
typically discarded. The resulting liquid is rich in numerous vitamins, minerals, antioxidants
(especially calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus, which are essential for bone health), and glycine.
Bone broth may be the easiest way to increase your glycine intake.
      Glycine is an important amino acid but not technically an essential one. Your body can make
glycine if it needs more than is supplied by your diet. But building our own amino acids is much less
efficient than getting them from the foods we eat, and scientists believe that we probably can’t make
enough glycine to keep up with our body’s demand in the absence of dietary sources. For those who
need to heal their bodies, eating plenty of glycine-rich foods will make a big difference.


What About Budget Concerns?

I know grass-fed and pasture-raised meat and wild-caught fish are more expensive. In fact, depending
on how you’re used to eating, many of the high-quality foods on the Paleo Approach will cost more
than the foods you ate before. You may find that your higher grocery bill is offset by savings in other
areas (like reduced medical expenses), but you may also be severely restricted in which foods you
can afford and wonder if there’s any point to following the Paleo Approach if you can’t afford, or
don’t have access to, the recommended foods.
      The answer is yes, there is. You can reap extraordinary benefits from avoiding the problematic
foods outlined in chapter 2 and doing the best you can in terms of quality when it comes to purchasing
nutrient-dense, healing foods.
      The tips and tricks for buying quality proteins on a budget are really the same as for buying
anything on a budget. It’s helpful to comparison-shop. Local farmers are often the most affordable
source for quality meats, but there are more and more online retailers to choose from. Even grass-fed
and pasture-raised meat goes on sale. The major online retailers of quality meats offer coupons fairly
regularly. (If you subscribe to their newsletters, you’ll know about current deals.) Also, buying a
large amount of meat at any given time often means a much lower price per pound. For example, you
might pay only $4 a pound (or less) if you’re buying a quarter or half of a pastured pig or grass-fed
cow. This is, of course, most useful for people who have a freezer, but even if you don’t, you can
round up a handful of friends or family members to share the meat. Another way to save money is to
buy larger pieces of meat, like big roasts and whole chickens. In general, the less work a butcher has
to do, the cheaper the meat will be per pound.




                                            Illustration by Rob Foster




How Do I Find a Local Farmer?
There are some great online directories for finding a local farmer or farmers’ market near you,
including the following websites:
www.localharvest.org
www.eatwellguide.org
www.eatwild.com
The number of farmers who sell their grass-fed and pasture-raised meat online is increasing
dramatically, and there are dozens of options to choose from. A quick Internet search will give you a
dizzying array of options.



     So what do you do if, even after finding the cheapest sources of quality meats available in your
area, you still can’t afford to eat exclusively high-quality proteins? Prioritize the proteins with the
highest fat content. This basically means that if only some of the meat you buy is grass-fed and
pasture-raised, make sure it’s your fatty cuts (which often tend to be the cheaper cuts anyway), such
as ground beef (don’t bother going for extra lean if you’re getting grass-fed!) or pork shoulder, to get
the most bang for your buck.
     Organ meat is often much less expensive than muscle meat because there just isn’t as much
demand for it. This can be a great way to incorporate grass-fed and pasture-raised meat into your
diet. Some small-scale farmers may even give you unusual cuts (or give you a drastically reduced
price) if they have trouble selling them.
      Canned fish (especially sardines and salmon) are great inexpensive options for getting more fish
into your diet (as long as the cans are BPA-free). Pickled herring and smoked kipper are often less
expensive as well. Frozen fish is another great option and is often very affordable. Most fish are
usually in season at certain times of the year, which is when those varieties go on sale.




Getting Used to Spending a Little More
As a society, we are used to being able to buy very inexpensive food. Over the last eighty years, the
average amount of money spent on food as a percentage of disposable income has dropped by nearly
60 percent. Health care expenses have also skyrocketed in that period.




         Data from the USDA Economic Research Service, Food Availability (Per Capita) Data System (www.ers.usda.gov).


Once you get over the sticker shock of quality meats and locally grown, organic vegetables, you may
decide that increasing your food budget in order to buy nutrient-dense foods (if that is within your
means) is the price you’re willing to pay for feeling better. The increases in your food budget may
also be offset by decreases in medical expenses or less money spent eating out. You don’t have to
spend more on food, and for many people, doing so is not an option. However, if you can spend a
little more on foods that will help your body heal, you will notice a difference.




Protein Priorities


It is important to include as much variety as possible, both in terms of the animal your protein comes
from and in terms of the cuts of meat from that animal. This is because different cuts of meat and
different animals provide slightly different nutrients in different quantities and ratios. Variety is the
best way to ensure that you get all the nutrition you need.

general, your protein will come from the following categories:
Offal. Organ meat is the most nutrient-dense protein. Organ meat and other nonmuscle cuts of meat
should be consumed at least four or five times a week. If possible, offal should come from grass-fed
and pasture-raised or wild-game sources. (Note that some organs from wild game, like bear liver, are
toxic for human consumption.) If you’re buying offal that comes from conventionally raised animals,
lamb and calf are the preferred sources nutrition-wise.




Seafood. Fatty fish, such as salmon, sardines, mackerel, and trout, should be consumed at least three
times a week (more if grass-fed and pasture-raised meat is not affordable). Seafood is very nutrient-
dense and is your best dietary source of EPA and DHA omega-3 fatty acids. The proteins are also
highly digestible. You can include fatty fish, white fish, and shellfish as often as you want. The more
variety, the better.
Red Meat. Red meat is likely to become the staple of your diet (after meeting a minimum intake of
offal and seafood). Grass-fed and pasture-raised meat and wild game are preferable, especially for
fattier cuts. If you’re buying conventional meat, stick with leaner cuts of beef and pork.




Poultry. Pastured poultry and game birds are preferable. Limit your consumption of conventional
poultry (because of its high omega-6 fatty acid content) to once or twice a week unless there is also a
large amount of seafood in your diet.
Vegetables and Fruit

Vegetables and fruit are essential sources of antioxidants, vitamins, and minerals. And, as discussed
in chapter 2, the fiber content of vegetables and fruit is extremely important for regulating hunger
hormones and normalizing gut microflora. It is just as important to consume healthy portions of
vegetables and fruit as it is to consume quality meat, poultry, and seafood. The only vegetables and
fruit excluded from the Paleo Approach are legumes and nightshades.
      In general, portions of vegetables should be unrestricted. There is an almost endless variety of
vegetables to choose from. Depending on where you live, the variety you have access to may be more
limited, but there are still typically dozens of choices even in your local grocery store. Farms,
farmers’ markets, and specialty grocery stores (such as Asian markets) can be great places to find
many of the less common vegetables.




Ever Heard That Red Meat Causes Cancer?




The link between red meat and cancer comes from diets that are simultaneously high in red meat
(including high in processed meats) and low in green vegetables. The protection offered by green
vegetables appears to be from chlorophyll (the component in plants that makes them green and
absorbs energy from sunlight), which prevents the metabolism of a component of red meat (heme,
which is much more concentrated in red meat than in other meats; see here) into toxic products in the
gut. Yet another reason to eat your greens!



Leafy greens and salad vegetables are fantastic sources of vitamins C, E, and K, as well as many of
the B vitamins, including folate. They are loaded with antioxidant carotenoids, including beta-
carotene, lutein, and zeaxanthin. Leafy greens are an important source of betaine (also known as
trimethylglycine or glycine betaine), which is very important for the methyl cycle and liver function.
Leafy greens are a great source of iron, calcium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, and manganese.
In fact, the calcium in some leafy greens, such as kale, is extremely absorbable and bioavailable
(more than milk!). Leafy greens even contain some omega-3 fatty acids, albeit predominantly ALA
and not the more useful EPA or DHA (see here).
Eat as many and as much of these leafy vegetables as you like, ideally with every meal:
• amaranth greens             • arugula (aka garden rocket)                • beet greens
• bok choy (aka pak choy)     • borage greens                              • broccoli rabe
• Brussels sprouts            • cabbage                                    • canola leaves
• carrot tops                 • cat’s-ear                                  • celery
• celtuce                     • ceylon spinach                             • chickweed
• chicory                     • Chinese mallow                             • chrysanthemum leaves
• collard greens              • cress                                      • dandelion greens
• endive                      • fat hen                                    • fiddleheads
• fluted pumpkin leaves       • Good King Henry                            • greater plantain
• kohlrabi greens             • kai-lan (aka gai lan and Chinese broccoli) • kale, many varieties
• komatsuna                   • lagos bologi                               • lamb’s lettuce
• land cress                  • lettuce, many varieties                    • lizard’s tail
• melokhia                    • mizuna                                     • mustard greens
• napa cabbage (aka siu choi) • New Zealand spinach                        • orache
• pea leaves                  • poke greens                                • radicchio
• samphire                    • sculpit (aka stridolo)                     • sea beet
• sea kale                    • sorrel                                     • spinach
• summer purslane             • sweet potato greens                        • Swiss chard
• tatsoi                      • turnip greens                              • watercress
• water spinach               • winter purslane
There are a variety of other nonstarchy vegetables to choose from, typically the stems, flowers, or
flower buds of various plants (rather than the leaves). These are rich in a wide variety of vitamins,
minerals, and antioxidants. Examples include:
 • artichoke          • asparagus                           • broccoli
 • caper              • cardoon                             • cauliflower
 • celery             • fennel                              • nopal
 • Prussian asparagus • rhubarb (only the stems are edible) • squash blossoms



Alliums (also known as the onion family) are a family of vegetables that are particularly aromatic
thanks to their concentration of organosulfur compounds (which means they are rich in sulfur). They
are also particularly rich in a variety of antioxidant compounds (which is why some alliums are
linked to reduced risk of cardiovascular disease), as well as manganese, selenium, iron, calcium,
vitamin C, and several B vitamins.



Vegetables from the allium family include:
• abusgata         • chive                   • elephant garlic
• garlic           • kurrat                  • leek
• onion            • pearl onion             • potato onion
• shallot          • spring onion (scallion) • tree onion
• wild leek (ramp)
Roots, tubers, and bulbs tend to be higher in starch content than other vegetables because they are
often the energy store for the plant. The amount of starch varies considerably, however. For example,
carrots have a very low glycemic load (that is, they are low in starch), but sweet potatoes have a
moderate one (see here). These vegetables tend to be very colorful, often yellow, orange, and red,
which makes them excellent sources of carotenoids and also vitamin C, several B vitamins, vitamin
K, phosphorus, potassium, copper, and manganese. Roots, tubers, and bulbs will be your major
provider of carbohydrates (along with fruit). Starchy vegetables tend to be higher in soluble fiber,
whereas nonstarchy vegetables tend to be higher in insoluble fiber (see here).



Roots, tubers, and bulb vegetables include:
• arracacha      • arrowroot            • bamboo shoot*
• beet           • burdock              • broadleaf arrowhead
• camas**        • canna                • carrot
• cassava*       • celeriac             • Chinese artichoke
• daikon         • earthnut pea         • elephant foot yam
• ensete         • ginger               • Hamburg parsley
• horseradish • Jerusalem artichoke • jicama
• kohlrabi       • lotus root           • mashua
• parsnip        • pignut               • prairie turnip
• radish         • rutabaga (aka swede) • salsify
• scorzonera     • skirret              • sweet potato
• taro           • ti                   • tigernut
• turnip         • ulluco               • wasabi
• water chestnut • yacón                • yam
* High in cyanogenic glycosides (see here).
** Death camas (Zigadenus venenosus) is sometimes confused with edible camas bulbs and is toxic.
Be sure of your identification of camas bulbs before eating them!




Sea vegetables are a well-known source of iodine, but they also contain substantial amounts of
calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, iron, chromium, and copper. In fact, sea vegetables have
especially high concentrations of trace minerals and typically contain more than fifty different kinds.
They are also a good source of some B vitamins as well as EPA and DHA omega-3 fatty acids
(which is unusual for plants). They also contain vitamins A, D, E, and K.



Roots, tubers, and bulb vegetables include:
• aonori                     • arame               • carola
• dabberlocks or badderlocks • dulse (aka dillisk) • hijiki
• kombu                      • laver (aka gim) • mozuku
• nori                       • ogonori
• sea grape                  • sea kale            • sea lettuce
• wakame




Algae, such as chlorella and spirulina (typically found in supplements but also in prepackaged green
juices), are excluded on the Paleo Approach because of their ability to stimulate the immune system.
Chlorella, which is a freshwater blue-green algae, is not recommended because recent evidence
suggests that the cell membrane of chlorella contains lipopolysaccharide, the same toxic protein in the
cell walls of Gram-negative bacteria (see here). It has also been shown to increase inflammation and
stimulate Th1 cells. Although spirulina, a blue-green algae that grows in saltwater lakes in Mexico
and Africa, has a very different cell membrane than chlorella, studies show that it also activates the
innate immune system and stimulates Th1 cells.
There are many fruits that are typically considered vegetables simply because they are not very sweet
(they are botanically classified as fruits because they contain seeds), and they are all loaded with
vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants. Avocado and olives are also great sources of monounsaturated
fats.



Vegetablelike fruits to incorporate into your diet include:
• avocado                       • bitter melon (aka bitter gourd) • chayote
• cucumber                      • ivy gourd                       • loofa
• okra (technically a seed pod) • olives                          • plantain
• pumpkin                       • squash                          • tinda
• West Indian gherkin           • winter melon                    • zucchini




Fruit is not restricted on the Paleo Approach. Fruit is a great source of fiber, vitamins, minerals, and
antioxidants. Recall that the Paleo Approach is not a low-carb diet; it’s just not a high-carb diet. And
even though fresh fruit does tend to have more sugar than vegetables, most fruits have low glycemic
loads. (Dried fruits tend to have very high glycemic loads, so they should be avoided or eaten
sparingly.) This means that even eating fruit several times a day will probably not negatively impact
your blood sugar. You just have to make sure that your daily fructose intake is between ten and twenty
grams—that’s about two to five servings of fruit a day (see here). The fructose content of fruits and
vegetables is listed in the nutrient tables here.
Berries generally have the most vitamins and minerals and the lowest sugar content of fruits. Because
they have such rich pigments, they also tend to be some of the most antioxidant-rich foods available.



Berries include:
• açaí                                        • bearberry       • bilberry
• blackberry                                  • blueberry       • cloudberry
• cranberry                                   • crowberry       • currant
• elderberry                                  • falberry        • gooseberry
• grape                                       • hackberry       • huckleberry
• lingonberry                                 • loganberry      • mulberry
• muscadine                                   • nannyberry      • Oregon grape
• raspberry                                   • salmonberry • sea buckthorn
• strawberry (technically an accessory fruit) • strawberry tree • thimbleberry
• Washington berry                            • wineberry




Fruits from the Rosaceae family include both apples and stone fruits. These fruits are packed with
carotenoids and other antioxidants, B vitamins, and vitamins C, E, and K and tend to be good sources
of calcium, potassium, phosphorus, manganese, copper, zinc, and iron. They also tend to be higher in
fiber than some other fruits.



Fruits from the Rosaceae family include:
• apple      • apricot      • cherry
• chokeberry • chokecherry • crabapple
• hawthorn • loquat         • medlar
• nectarine • peach         • pear
• plum       • quince       • rose hip
• rowan      • serviceberry • service tree
• shipova
Melons encompass a vast array of different fruit. Many melons are very low in sugar. And they are
great sources of antioxidants, vitamins, and minerals, including a variety of carotenoids, B vitamins,
vitamin C, manganese, potassium, calcium, selenium, copper, zinc, and magnesium.



Among the melons you might enjoy are:
• canary melon                    • cantaloupe      • casaba
• charentais                      • Christmas melon • crenshaw
• derishi                         • galia           • honeydew
• horned melon                    • melon pear      • muskmelon
• net melon                       • ogen melon      • Persian melon
• Russian melon (aka Uzbek melon) • sharlyn         • watermelon
• winter melon




Citrus is well known for being very high in vitamin C, but it is also high in B vitamins, vitamin E,
carotenoids (antioxidants and precursors of vitamin A), calcium, iron, phosphorus, magnesium,
potassium, sodium, copper, zinc, manganese, and selenium. Citrus is also lower in sugar than many
other fruits, depending on the variety. (Clearly, lemons are a low-sugar fruit, but even oranges are
fairly low in sugar compared with other options.)
There is a surprising wealth of citrus fruits, among them:
• amanatsu • blood orange • Buddha’s hand
• cam sành • citron        • clementine
• fernandina • grapefruit  • kaffir lime
• key lime • kinnow        • kiyomi
• kumquat • lemon          • lime
• limetta    • mandarin    • Meyer lemon
• orangelo • orange        • oroblanco
• pomelo • pompia          • ponkan
• rangpur • shonan gold • sudachi
• tangelo • tangerine      • tangor
• ugli fruit • yuzu




There are literally thousands of tropical and subtropical fruits (including citrus). As a general rule,
tropical fruits are higher in sugar than other fruits, and there are fruits on this list whose sugar content
is through the roof, but there are plenty of exceptions.



Among the myriad varieties of tropical fruit:
• abiu            • acerola   • ackee
• African moringa • ambarella • babaco
• banana          • biribi    • camucamu
• canistel        • ceriman   • chayote
• cherimoya       • coco plum • coconut
• custard apple • date        • dragonfruit
• durian          • fig        • gambooge
• granadilla      • guava      • guavaberry
• guanabana       • ilama      • jackfruit
• jujube          • karonda    • kiwi
• korlan          • kumquat • longan
• loquat          • lychee     • mamey sapote
• mango           • mangosteen • maypop
• medlar          • nance      • papaya
• passionfruit    • pawpaw • peanut butter fruit
• persimmon       • pineapple • plantain
• pomegranate     • pulasan    • quince
• rambutan        • riberry    • rose apple
• safou           • salak      • santol
• soursop         • star apple • star fruit (carambola)
• sugar apple     • tamarind • ugni
• vanilla         • wampee




      You may have heard the expression “eat the rainbow.” That means including vegetables and
fruits of different colors in your diet, because the same components that act as pigments in plants are
also nutrients. So eating foods in a variety of colors is a simple way to ensure that you get a full
spectrum of nutrients. For example, chlorophyll is responsible for the green pigment in green
vegetables and green fruit such as kiwi (see here). Carotenoids, which are powerful antioxidants, are
responsible for the yellow, orange, and red pigments in fruits and vegetables. Blue and purple
pigments come from flavonoids, which generally have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties
and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Don’t think that because white vegetables and fruit
(like cauliflower, mushrooms, and apples) seem colorless, they are less nutritious: they are also rich
in vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants.
      Just as with protein sources, the more variety of plant matter you can consume, the better. The
best way to ensure that you are getting an adequate variety of vegetables is to eat them at every meal
(yes, even breakfast) and to eat at least two kinds (ideally different colors) with each meal. Because
of the nutrient density of green vegetables, aiming for one green vegetable and one vegetable of
another color at most meals is a good goal. And if you feel like eating ten different vegetables at a
sitting, go for it!


Being Mindful of Glycemic Load

Glycemic load has been mentioned several times throughout this book as a tool for making sure that
your blood-sugar levels remain well regulated, which is critical for normalizing hormones and
resolving inflammation. Being mindful of glycemic load amounts to being mindful of how the foods
you eat impact your blood sugar. Carbohydrates encompass starches, sugars, and fiber—and both
sugars and starches impact your blood-glucose level in proportion to how much you consume and
how quickly your food is digested. But your body still requires carbohydrates, and the foods that
contain them (vegetables and fruit) are still nutrient-dense foods. So how do you eat well and make
sure that your blood sugar is well regulated?
     Recall that glycemic load is a measure of how quickly the sugars in a specific food impact your
blood sugar, corrected for how carbohydrate dense that food actually is (see here). Almost all high-
glycemic-load foods are omitted on the Paleo Approach because they tend to be grains, pseudo-
grains, legumes, and refined sugars. (Dried fruit is the only high-glycemic-load food that is allowed
and should be considered an indulgence.) What’s left are mostly low-glycemic-load foods with a few
moderate-glycemic-load vegetables and fruits.




Glycemic-Load Guide
The glycemic loads for foods are listed in the nutrient tables here.

      As a general rule, there’s no reason to restrict portions, even of foods with a moderate glycemic
load, because, even with moderate-glycemic-load foods, you have to eat pretty massive quantities to
negatively impact your blood sugar. If you are eating balanced meals (some animal products, some
plant matter, some quality fats), are focusing on variety by including different-colored vegetables and
fruit with each meal, are eating regular meals spaced far enough apart, and are eating only to satiety
(until you feel full), your blood-sugar levels are extremely likely to be well regulated without your
even trying. This means that once you put effort into choosing some kind of meat or seafood, a couple
of vegetables, and maybe some fruit, you really don’t need to worry about anything else. That’s right.
You do not need to measure or restrict (except maybe to be make sure that you aren’t overdoing
fructose), and you certainly don’t need to worry about portion control. Just eat until you are full.
      Highly active people, children, and pregnant or lactating women do need more carbohydrates
than more sedentary adults. As long as those carbohydrates are coming from low- and moderate-
glycemic-load vegetables and fruit, these people should have no trouble keeping their blood-sugar
levels under control.
      There is one caveat: if you have diabetes (type 1 or 2), have a history of obesity or metabolic
derangement, or are very insulin-resistant, it might be easier to regulate your blood sugar by
controlling your portions of moderate-glycemic-load foods (which means that those fried plantains
should be a side dish rather than cover the whole plate, but individual sensitivity will vary). If you
suspect that your blood-sugar levels are out of whack when you eat starchy vegetables and fruit
liberally, a good way to find out for sure is to use a glucometer. Glucometers are used by diabetics to
measure blood glucose and can be easily and inexpensively purchased without a prescription at most
pharmacies. A small needle, called a lancet, is used to prick your finger, and a small drop of blood is
used to measure your blood sugar.
      The American Diabetic Association defines normal fasting blood sugar (what your blood sugar
is first thing in the morning when you wake up) as anything less than 99 milligrams per deciliter (a
tenth of a liter). How much your blood-glucose level rises after a meal is very important. The
American Diabetic Association considers blood sugar less than 140 milligrams per deciliter
measured two hours after eating (postmeal) to be normal. (The standard is to measure postmeal
glucose two hours after the start of your meal, since how long it takes to eat will vary from person to
person.) These are fairly good gauges for determining whether your blood sugar is well regulated.
However, research supports optimal fasting glucose being more likely less than 85 to 90 milligrams
per deciliter and that two-hour postmeal glucose should more be likely less than 120 milligrams per
deciliter.


Normal Blood-Glucose Levels




       Unless you have diabetes, it is not necessary to check your blood-sugar level after every meal.
Instead, check your blood-sugar level when you think you might have eaten too much of a moderate-
glycemic-load food to get a gauge on whether your portion really was too big. You don’t need to get
overly concerned if your blood-sugar level is higher than you would like. (Many things can elevate
blood sugar besides food, like stress.) Just use the information to decrease your intake of that food a
little next time. Occasionally measuring blood-sugar levels is just a tool to help you dial down your
starchy vegetable and fruit consumption if you are more susceptible to elevated blood sugar after
meals.
       Another way to gauge blood-sugar regulation is to have your doctor test your hemoglobin A1C
(glycated hemoglobin). This is a form of hemoglobin (a protein in red blood cells; see here) that has
been glycosylated (see here), an irreversible post-translational modification for hemoglobin. The
chances of hemoglobin being glycosylated increase with blood-glucose level, so how high your A1C
level is indicates how well your blood-sugar levels have been regulated for the previous six to
twelve weeks (the average life span of red blood cells). While an A1C level between 4 percent and
5.6 percent is considered normal, research shows that optimal A1C is less than 5 percent. Also note
that certain micronutrient deficiencies (iron) and certain supplements (vitamin C and vitamin E) can
cause abnormal A1C levels even if your blood sugar is very well regulated.




Low-Starch Strategies to Quell Bacterial Overgrowth
     Some alternative health care practitioners will recommend a low-starch diet if you have severe
bacterial or yeast overgrowth, the idea being that by restricting your intake of carbohydrates to very
simple, easily absorbed sugars (usually monosaccharides), you will starve the overpopulation of
bacteria or yeast in your gut. While there have been no clinical trials evaluating this strategy, many
people report success with it. Conversely, many people report other problems, like compromised
thyroid function and cortisol dysregulation (see here), with this approach. Because this strategy has
not been validated in the scientific literature, it is not part of the Paleo Approach (instead, see
FODMAPs; see here).




However, if you are interested in using this strategy in combination with the Paleo Approach,
more information can be found in Gut and Psychology Syndrome, by Dr. Natasha Campbell-
McBride, and Breaking the Vicious Cycle: Intestinal Health Through Diet, by Elaine Gloria
Gottschall.



     Being mindful of glycemic load is not about restricting or measuring but rather about giving you
the power to adapt your food choices for your needs.

Raw or Cooked?

The art of fire and cooking was mastered perhaps as early as 1.5 million years ago. This means that,
for the majority of human evolution, our ancestors have been eating cooked food. In fact, the advent of
cooking may be one of the most important factors in our success as a species, because it greatly
increased the nutrition that could be absorbed from our food. (This is true for both meat and plant
matter.) However, while cooking improves digestibility, it also affects the micronutrient content of
our food.
      Some vitamins are very volatile when exposed to heat. Vitamin C, for example, degrades with
heat, dehydration, and prolonged storage. Polyphenols, which are antioxidants known to reduce the
risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer, are destroyed by cooking. Some beneficial enzymes are
destroyed by cooking: myrosinase, for example, whose activity forms the isothiocyanate
sulforaphane, which is known to prevent cancer, is found in raw cruciferous vegetables but is
destroyed by cooking. Allicin (the compound in garlic responsible for its antibiotic and antimicrobial
properties and that also reduces the risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease) is destroyed by heat.
The loss of these nutrients forms a good case for eating raw vegetables.
      But the loss of many nutrients through cooking is offset by the many other nutrients that are
augmented by cooking. Heat breaks down the thick walls of a plant’s cells, which makes any nutrients
bound to the cell wall or locked inside the cells available to our bodies for digestion. Typically,
antioxidants are significantly increased by cooking. For example, many carotenoids increase in
bioavailability when vegetables that contain them are cooked. Lycopene increases when foods that
contain it are cooked or dried. And some compounds require heat to be formed, such as indole, which
is thought to prevent cancer and is formed when cruciferous vegetables (like broccoli and kale) are
cooked.
      What this means is that it’s best to eat both cooked and raw vegetables. You should sometimes
cook your carrots, sometimes eat them straight out of the bag (or, better yet, the garden). However, if
you have noticeable difficulties digesting raw vegetables (any gastrointestinal symptoms that occur
regularly when you eat raw vegetables or identifiable vegetable matter in your feces), you may want
to limit yourself to cooked vegetables until your digestion (and stool quality) improves. The inability
to digest raw vegetables also indicates that digestive-support supplements are a good idea (see here).

What About the Goitrogens in Cruciferous Veggies?

Those with autoimmune thyroid disorders (e.g., Hashimoto’s thyroiditis or Graves’ disease) and
those with low thyroid function (which often accompanies other autoimmune diseases) are often
advised to avoid cruciferous vegetables, spinach, radishes, peaches, and strawberries because of
their goitrogenic properties. Goitrogens are compounds that suppress the function of the thyroid gland
by interfering with iodine uptake. (Recall that iodine is a necessary component of thyroid hormones;
see here.) Thyroid hormones have essential roles in metabolism and even in regulating the immune
system, so supporting optimal thyroid function is important for healing and for general health. But
avoiding these foods is not well justified.
      This family of vegetables is a great source of a group of sulfur-containing compounds called
glucosinolates (see here). When these vegetables are chopped or chewed, the enzyme myrosinase in
these plants breaks the glucosinolates apart (through hydrolysis) into a variety of biologically active
compounds, many of which are potent antioxidants and prevent cancer. Two of them—isothiocyanates
and thiocyanates—are also known goitrogens.
      Isothiocyanates and thiocyanates appear to reduce thyroid function by inhibiting the enzyme
thyroid peroxidase (also known as thyroperoxidase, or TPO). During thyroid hormone synthesis, TPO
is the enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of iodine to a protein called thyroglobulin to produce either
T4 thyroid prohormone (thyroxine) or the more active T3 thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine). When
isothiocyanates or thiocyanates are consumed in large enough quantities, they interfere with the
function of the thyroid gland.
      There is no evidence of a link between human consumption of isothiocyanates or thiocyanates
and thyroid pathologies in the absence of iodine deficiency: these substances have been shown to
interfere with thyroid function only in people lacking adequate amounts of iodine. (If you are severely
deficient in iodine or selenium, addressing that deficiency before eating tons of cruciferous
vegetables is a good idea; see here. Also note that myrosinase is deactivated by cooking, so cooked
cruciferous vegetables can still be enjoyed while you’re working on correcting any deficiencies.) In
fact, eating cruciferous vegetables correlates with diverse health benefits, including reducing the risk
of cancer (even thyroid cancer!). In a recent clinical trial evaluating the safety of isothiocyanates
isolated from broccoli sprouts, no adverse effects were reported (including no reductions in thyroid
function).



The cruciferous family comprises many of the most antioxidant-, vitamin-, and mineral-rich
vegetables available, including:
• arugula (aka rocket) • bok choy              • broccoli
• broccoflower         • broccoli romanesco • Brussels sprouts
• cabbage              • canola (aka rapeseed) • cauliflower
• Chinese broccoli • collard greens            • daikon
• field pepperweed • flowering cabbage         • garden cress
• horseradish          • kale                  • kohlrabi
• komatsun and cress • maca                    • mizuna
• mustard              • radish                • rapini (aka broccoli rabe)
• rutabaga             • tatsoi                • turnip
• wasabi               • watercress            • wild broccoli




     Perhaps even more compelling, at low concentrations (like what you would get from including
cruciferous vegetables in your diet), thiocyanates stimulate T4 synthesis, meaning that these
vegetables labeled as goitrogens actually support thyroid function. There is also a strong synergy
between isothiocyanates and selenium in the formation of the very important enzymes thioredoxin
reductase and glutathione peroxidase (see here). This means that the consumption of isothiocyanates
in conjunction with selenium gives the body’s antioxidant defense mechanisms a tremendous boost
and helps prevent cancer. So eat more rather than fewer of those cruciferous vegetables, even if you
have autoimmune thyroid diseases, as long as you’re not deficient in iodine and selenium.
     The most important aspect of supporting thyroid function is providing the necessary minerals for
thyroid hormone production, especially iodine, iron, selenium, and zinc. Deficiencies in any of these
may impair thyroid function, but the effect is greatly magnified when there is a deficiency in more than
one of these minerals. Iodine is a necessary building block of thyroid hormones, and the thyroid
cannot function properly without sufficient iodine (see here). Iron deficiency impairs thyroid hormone
synthesis by reducing TPO activity (which is heme-dependent; see here). As discussed in chapter 2,
selenium is required for the conversion of the T4 thyroid prohormone (thyroxine) to the active T3
thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine) because the enzymes responsible for this conversion
(iodothyronine deiodinases) are selenoproteins. Selenium is also essential for protecting the thyroid
gland from the effects of excessive iodide (which inhibits TPO activity). Zinc is believed to play an
important role in thyroid metabolism, ostensibly in the conversion of T4 to T3, and zinc levels
correlate with the levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), although the ramifications of zinc
deficiency for thyroid function remain a subject of debate.

FODMAP Intolerance

      For those with gastrointestinal symptoms, FODMAP intolerance (sometimes called fructose
malabsorption or FODMAP sensitivity) is a distinct possibility. FODMAP is an acronym for
“fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides and monosaccharides and polyols,” which are
basically a group of highly fermentable, short- and medium-chain carbohydrates (typically high in
fructose or lactose) and sugar alcohols. These carbohydrates are inefficiently absorbed in the small
intestine, even in very healthy people, and the bacteria in your gut love them (which is what makes
them highly fermentable).
      When too many fermentable sugars enter the large intestine, which has the highest concentrations
of gut microflora, they feed the bacteria, causing excess production of gas and, in more extreme cases,
overgrowth of bacteria. This is exactly what happens in FODMAP intolerance. The presence of these
carbohydrates in the large intestine can also decrease water absorption (one of the main jobs of the
large intestine). This overfeeding of your gut microbiota causes a variety of digestive symptoms, most
typically bloating, gas, cramps, diarrhea, constipation, indigestion, and sometimes excessive
belching.
      Almost everyone who eats FODMAP-dense foods experiences gastrointestinal symptoms to
some degree (the source of “Beans, beans, the musical fruit”). In fact, eating a lot of inulin fiber
(which is a FODMAP and is often added to foods and included in supplements as a prebiotic) has
been shown to significantly alter the composition of the gut microflora (although whether for the
better and whether the healthy body is well adapted to large amounts of inulin is in dispute). In the
case of FODMAP intolerance, these symptoms are magnified for a few reasons. FODMAP
intolerance simply means that your body is less able to digest these types of carbohydrates. This may
be because of a lack of digestive enzymes to break down these particular molecules (see here) or
because of an insufficient amount of GLUT5 transporters in the cell membranes of the enterocytes to
transport fructose across the gut barrier (see here). In most cases, both of these mechanisms are
probably at work to some extent, the end result being that a far greater portion of these sugars enter
the large intestine unabsorbed, causing magnified symptoms and overgrowth of bacteria in the large
intestine.




The FODMAP-Tryptophan Link
Fructose malabsorption is associated with lower tryptophan levels because high concentrations of
fructose in the intestines seem to interfere with L-tryptophan metabolism. This may then reduce the
availability of tryptophan for the biosynthesis of serotonin and melatonin (see here). If you suffer from
depression and anxiety, a low-FODMAP (or simply a low-fructose) diet may be helpful. Because of
the roles that serotonin and melatonin play in regulating intestinal peristalsis, this may be another
mechanism by which reducing FODMAPs decreases symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome.



      Over time, FODMAP intolerance can lead to overgrowth of bacteria farther up the digestive
tract, eventually causing small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO;see here). FODMAP
intolerance is also a possible consequence of a leaky or damaged gut (which means that SIBO might
come first). With fewer healthy cells to transport fructose across the gut barrier, more fructose is
available to feed gut microorganisms. It is also a possible consequence of poor digestion, which
might be a result of inadequate stomach acid (see here) or strain on the pancreas, liver, or
gallbladder. Regardless of whether FODMAP intolerance is the chicken or the egg, a vicious cycle
can ensue. In those with SIBO, eating FODMAP-packed foods can exacerbate symptoms and
perpetuate overgrowth, which can perpetuate a leaky gut, which then makes FODMAP intolerance
worse.
      When it comes to modifying your diet to address a suspected FODMAP intolerance, how much
FODMAP-rich food you eat is the key. The type of FODMAP may also be important for many people.
Essentially, if you are FODMAP-intolerant, large amounts of fructose and longer-chain carbohydrates
full of fructose are problematic. These longer, fructose-rich carbohydrate chains are called fructans
(inulin is an example). Sugar alcohols, also called polyols (see here), are additionally problematic
because they can block GLUT5 carriers. (And if you’re working with a deficiency, that’s really not
helpful!) In general, the longer-chain fructans cause the most issues (probably because they are the
hardest to digest, so they present the most fructose to the large intestine). However, many people are
sensitive to all FODMAPs, including fructans, polyols, and free fructose. (Free fructose is merely a
fructose molecule that is not part of a carbohydrate chain; it is found in fruit and some vegetables and
is listed in both nutrition facts labels and in the nutrient tables on see here as fructose. Similarly, free
glucose is just a glucose molecule and is listed in nutrition facts labels and in the nutrient tables as
glucose.) Medical tests can diagnose fructose malabsorption (the hydrogen breath test, for example;
see here), but an elimination-diet approach tends to be a more sensitive diagnostic.
      A large number of clinical trials have shown that removing FODMAPs from the diet is
beneficial for sufferers of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and other functional gastrointestinal
disorders. Standard recommendations for people with suspected FODMAP intolerance are to avoid
eating foods that contain:


    More than 0.5 grams of free fructose in excess of free glucose per 100-gram serving
    More than 3 grams of free fructose in an average serving regardless of glucose content
    More than 0.2 grams of fructans per serving


     Most of the foods with the greatest amounts of FODMAPs (wheat, barley, rye, dairy products,
legumes, high-fructose corn syrup, agave nectar, and sugar alcohols).
     There are very few scientific studies that have systematically measured the FODMAP content of
foods. The following lists should be considered incomplete.

These fruits contain more than 0.5 grams of free fructose in excess of free glucose per 100-
gram serving:


    apples
    grapes
    mangoes
    pears
    watermelon



These fruits contain more than 3 grams of free fructose per 100-gram serving:


    all canned fruit
    all dried fruit
    all fruit juices
    apples
    bananas (ripe only)
    blueberries
    cherries
    dates
    figs
    grapes
    guavas
    kiwis
    mangoes
    pears
    plums
    watermelon
     large servings of any fruit



These fruits and vegetables contain more than 0.2 grams of fructans per 100-gram serving:


     artichokes, globe
     artichokes, Jerusalem*
     asparagus (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     beets
     broccoli (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     Brussels sprouts
     bulb onions*
     butternut squash (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     cabbage (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     chicory root
     coconut (except coconut oil)
     dandelion greens
     fennel bulb (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     garlic*
     grapefruit
     green onions (white part only)
     honeydew melon
     leeks (white part only)*
     longons
     nectarines
     okra
     onions
     peaches, white
     persimmons
     rambutan
     shallots*
     sweet potatoes (conflicting measurements; some say no fructans)
     watermelon
     zucchini


*Denotes very high fructan content.

These fruits and vegetables contain significant amounts of polyols:


     apples
     apricots
     avocados
     blackberries
     cauliflower
     celery
     cherries
     longons
     lychees
     mushroom
     nashi pear
     nectarines
     peaches
     pears
     plums
     prunes
     snow peas
     sweet potatoes
     watermelon



     A low-FODMAP diet is appropriate for anyone with gastrointestinal disorders, including those
with IBS in addition to autoimmune disease. In fact, anyone with gastrointestinal issues, especially
symptoms that persist beyond a month after adopting the Paleo Approach and after incorporating
digestive-support supplements (see here), may benefit from reducing high-FODMAP foods.




But I Love Garlic!!!




Garlic—it’s everywhere and it’s delicious! If you think you need to follow a low-FODMAP diet and
are lamenting the loss of this favorite seasoning, I’ve got three tricks for you. The first is to use garlic
juice instead of whole garlic in your cooking. Simply purée a head of garlic in a mini food processor,
then filter through a sieve lined with a paper towel (no need to even bother peeling it!). The second is
to use (or make your own) garlic-infused oils. Simply chop garlic and mix with avocado or olive oil.
Just make sure to strain out the chunks before you pour. If you are lucky enough to find fresh young
garlic (looks similar to a leek) or garlic scrapes at a local farm or farmers’ market, you can use the
green part in cooking and the white to make garlic-infused oil!
     As far as compensating for the loss of onions: You can use the green part of leeks or spring
onions to add an oniony flavor to your cooking. Chives are another great option. Another is to use
asafetida powder, which comes from a root and is a commonly used in Indian cuisine. (Just make sure
to check the ingredients, since it is often combined with wheat starch.)




Looking for More Resources?
Check out Digestive Health with Real Food, by Aglaée Jacob.



     Fortunately, FODMAP intolerance will most likely disappear for most people as their guts heal
and their gut microflora levels and diversity normalize. Some people find that after as little as two to
three weeks on a low-FODMAP diet, they can begin to reincorporate these foods (unfortunately,
others find that it takes months). It’s up to you whether to eliminate FODMAP-rich foods when you
adopt the Paleo Approach or to keep that possibility in mind for troubleshooting later (see chapter 8).

Vegetable Juices and Green Smoothies

If you aren’t used to eating large portions of vegetables, you may be wondering if it’s OK to boost
your vegetable intake with green juices or green smoothies. If you enjoy them, you will most likely be
able to drink them, but there are a few things to keep in mind.
      Green juices are no longer a whole food. The process of juicing removes the fiber from the
vegetables and fruits. This has the net effect of making many of the vitamins, minerals, and
antioxidants much more absorbable, although you may be losing some valuable vitamins and minerals
in the pulp. Also recall that fiber is a crucial nutrient (see here) and an important signal for ghrelin
(see here). Furthermore, removing fiber makes the sugars much more absorbable, which is actually
the biggest concern with green juices. Even if they are made entirely of vegetables (some fruit is often
added to improve the taste), they can substantially impact blood sugar. This can be ameliorated by
drinking green juice with a meal (even if conventional wisdom is that it’s better to drink them on their
own) and by limiting portion size. Incorporating green juices into the diet is a good option for those
with severe gastrointestinal damage who are having a hard time digesting even cooked vegetables. (If
this applies to you, also make sure that you are using digestive support supplements; see here.)
      Green smoothies may seem like a better alternative because the fiber is not removed. Some
people with autoimmune diseases affecting the gastrointestinal tract even report that drinking green
smoothies (typically made in a very high-powered blender) is the only way that they can consume
large quantities of vegetables without incurring digestive distress. However, drinking your food can
be hard on your digestive system because the simple act of chewing is an important signal to your
body to increase stomach-acid secretion, which in turn signals secretion of digestive enzymes from
the pancreas and bile from the gallbladder (see here). If a smoothie replaces a meal, then your body’s
ability to digest the nutrients in that smoothie is also inhibited. This is made even worse by eating on
the go, since the body does not prioritize digestion when it is moving (or if you are stressed, as you
may be during your commute to work). The combination of a liquid meal and not taking the time to eat
and digest has the net effect of feeding your gut bacteria (coupled with the fact that green smoothies
are typically very high in fiber) and not you. This can be ameliorated by including green smoothies as
part of a meal (and not as the meal itself), by using digestive-support supplements (see here), and by
practicing good meal hygiene (see here).




Protein Powders and Postworkout Nutrition




In general, if you are working out so intensely that you need a liquid pre- or postworkout meal in
order to recover, you are probably working out too intensely (see here). However, it’s nice to know
which protein powders are the best options, as they can be useful when traveling. The only options
are gelatin or collagen, which do not provide the balanced protein that meat, poultry, seafood, or offal
provides (but is rich in glycine and some other useful amino acids; see here); hydrolyzed beef isolate
or plasma (dried and concentrated plasma, which is a component of blood); and dehydrated insect
powder (typically cricket and hard to find commercially). Hydrolyzed beef isolate and plasma
typically also include sunflower, canola or soy lecithin, which may be irritating to the gut for some.
Gelatin can be mixed with warm liquids, and collagen can be mixed into any beverage. Crickets can
be purchased from pet stores, dried in a dehydrator, and ground to a powder. Homemade protein
powder could similarly be made by dehydrating and grinding any meat. All these powders can be
included in shakes and smoothies. Another great liquid protein option for before or after a workout is
broth.



     Many people swear by green juices and green smoothies to up their micronutrient intake. If you
love them or struggle to get enough vegetables otherwise, then by all means go ahead and drink them
(with meals). But for most people, there is no advantage to swapping them out for whole vegetables.
If anything, the opposite is true.


Quality Matters

Just as in the case of protein sources, quality is important when it comes to vegetables and fruits.
There are two issues to consider. The first is the use of pesticides (insecticides and herbicides) in
conventionally grown produce and the effect that these chemicals may have on your immune system.
The second is the quality of the soil that your vegetables and fruit are grown in and how this impacts
the micronutrient content of your food.
      The impact of pesticides as a source of environmental estrogens was already discussed (see
here). However, this is far from the only reason to be leery of exposure to these chemicals. In fact,
many pesticides are known to negatively impact the immune system (although there certainly remains
a desperate need for more research on this topic). In fact, many pesticides are immunotoxic (i.e., toxic
to the immune system). The effects of these chemicals can be broadly categorized as either
suppression of the immune system or inappropriate stimulation of the immune system—both of which
can be hazardous to those with autoimmune disease.
      The most immunotoxic class of pesticides is organochlorinated pesticides, many of which are
now illegal (some are even banned globally). These pesticides increase proinflammatory cytokines,
decrease neutrophil and natural-killer-cell function, decrease regulatory T-cell populations, decrease
cytotoxic T cell populations, alter the ratio of CD4+ and CD8+ cells, and even increase autoantibody
formation. While they are mostly being phased out of agricultural use, newer pesticides may also
contribute to immune-function problems. Studies have linked organophosphates and carbamates (both
widely used as insecticides) to changes in the ratios of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, including
influencing Th1 versus Th2 dominance, but also inhibiting the activities of neutrophils and natural
killer cells. The widely used agricultural pesticide tributyltin chloride, an organotin pesticide, has
been shown to cause thymocyte death in the thymus gland (see here). Atrazine, another organotin
pesticide, has been shown to decrease natural-killer-cell activity. The insecticide propanil has been
shown to decrease T cells and B cells (in both the thymus and bone marrow); reduce natural killer
cells, macrophages, and cytokine production; and cause thymic atrophy.
      As scary as this sounds, most of the studies evaluating the effects of pesticides on the immune
system mimic occupational exposure rather than the much lower exposure that the majority of us
would have simply by eating produce from crops treated with these chemicals. While large
epidemiological studies on the correlation between insecticides and autoimmune diseases have not
been performed, the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study did show a positive correlation
between insecticide use and risk of both rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (that’s
insecticide use as in your garden, not consumption in produce). What effect the very small amount of
these chemicals that might be found on conventional produce causes in either a healthy person or in
someone with autoimmune disease remains unknown. However, it is reasonable to assume that
because those with autoimmune disease are more sensitive to substances that may alter their immune
systems, reducing pesticide exposure is sensible.
      The easiest way to reduce exposure to pesticides is to buy organically grown produce whenever
possible. Certain food crops tend to have more residual pesticides than others, and familiarizing
yourself with the “Dirty Dozen” is a good way to prioritize which foods to buy organic if budget is a
factor. The Dirty Dozen is a list of the foods that contain the highest amounts (and the most different
types) of pesticides, composed every year by the Environmental Working Group. (The Environmental
Working Group— www.ewg.org—also puts together a “Clean Fifteen” list of the fifteen crops with
the least amount of pesticides.) As a general rule, fruits from the apple family, stone fruits, berries,
and leafy greens are veterans of the Dirty Dozen list. Another way to lower your pesticide exposure
is to peel fruits and vegetables before eating. (For example, peeling apples will remove the majority
of the pesticides.)

2013 Dirty Dozen




     apples
     celery
     cherry tomatoes
     cucumbers
     grapes
     hot peppers
     nectarines, imported
     peaches
     potatoes
     spinach
     strawberries
     sweet bell peppers


*For the most current Dirty Dozen and Clean Fifteen lists, visit the Environmental Working Group
website, www.ewg.org.

2013 Clean Fifteen




     asparagus
     avocados
     cabbage
     cantaloupe
     sweet corn
     eggplant
     grapefruit
     kiwis
     mangoes
     mushrooms
     onions
     papayas
     pineapple
     sweet peas (frozen)
     sweet potatoes


     The other factor to consider when buying produce is the quality of the soil in which it is grown.
Industrial farming practices strip nutrients from the soil. As a result, the vegetables we buy in grocery
stores have fewer nutrients than the same vegetables would have had fifty years ago (the longer time
between when the vegetable is picked and when it makes an appearance on your plate is also a
contributor). Some of the nutrients we are losing in our produce are the nutrients that those with
autoimmune disease need more of, including copper, calcium, potassium, phosphorus, iron,
magnesium, zinc, vitamin B2, vitamin B6, vitamin C, and vitamin E. In fact, some of the measured
reductions in the mineral content of vegetables and fruit are very dramatic—as much as 75 percent
less of some minerals in conventionally grown vegetables compared with the same vegetables fifty
years ago. In addition to these important vitamins and minerals, trace minerals are probably
decreasing dramatically as well. Growing vegetables in good-quality soil also increases other
nutrients, including antioxidant phytochemicals. For example, growing alliums and cruciferous
vegetables in selenium-rich soil significantly increases their cancer-preventing properties thanks to
increases in selenium-containing phytochemicals.




How Do I Find a Local Farmer?
There are some great online directories for finding a local farmer, farmers’ market, CSA, or pick-
your-own farm near you, including:
www.eatwellguide.org
www.localharvest.org
www.pickyourown.org
      One of the best things you can do is to source local farmers who care about their dirt (these are
usually the same farmers who grow their vegetables and fruit organically). Fortunately, this is much
easier to do these days than even ten years ago with the formation and growth of farmers’ markets.
You might find a good roadside stand or hobby farm that you can buy from. You may be able to join a
local vegetable co-op or participate in a farm share program known as a CSA (community-supported
agriculture), where you pay for a portion of the farm’s crops and get a box of that week’s harvest
every week during the season. In many urban areas, there are services that will deliver a box of
locally grown, typically organic produce to your door every week. When you buy your produce this
way, you also end up eating seasonally (see here) and eating much fresher produce than is generally
found at the grocery store. (Your fruits and vegetables also retain more micronutrients than those that
have been stored longer and shipped greater distances.) One of the fun aspects of co-ops, farm shares,
and CSAs is that what you get is often a surprise. It’s a great way to add some adventure to your life,
try something new, and increase variety. You may also enjoy growing some of your own vegetables
and fruits, if possible—even if you just grow some fresh herbs in a container garden on your balcony
or in pots in your kitchen window. When vegetables are grown in good dirt, they will have some of
the highest micronutrient density of any produce you can buy. They will also taste amazing.

Budget Concerns

Just as with proteins, making the best choices you can within your budget is all you can do. It’s OK if
the produce you eat is a mix of locally grown, purchased at a farmers’ market, and conventional.
When possible, try to buy Dirty Dozen produce organically (or peel it).
      One way to save money on produce is to buy frozen vegetables—but check the labels to make
sure nothing is added. It’s also an inexpensive way to buy vegetables picked at the peak of freshness
and then flash-frozen to preserve the micronutrient content. Plus, having a few packages of vegetables
in your freezer can bring some ease to rushed midweek meals. Canned or jarred vegetables are
another good option. Again, check the ingredients, and make sure the cans are BPA-free.
      Other ways of buying quality produce on a tight budget include looking out for coupons and
sales. You can stock up when one of your staple vegetables goes on sale and freeze vegetables
yourself. (Some, but not all, need to be blanched first.) You can also make batches of your favorite
dishes using sale vegetables and freeze the meals for nights when you don’t have the time or energy to
cook.
      And comparison-shop: one local grocery store may always have the best prices on organic
carrots, but another may be the best place for green plantains. If you can’t remember prices easily, try
using a notebook to jot down the prices of your most often purchased items at each of the grocery
stores or markets you frequent. There are also apps for your smartphone to help you keep track of that
info. Getting the best price on staple items can make a big difference in your budget (and then if you
pay a few cents more per pound on other items here and there, it doesn’t matter as much).
      Also, certain vegetables—like cabbage, collard greens, kale, sweet potatoes, rutabagas, turnips,
carrots, broccoli, cauliflower, and plantains—just tend to be cheaper both because of how much you
get for your buck and how far they stretch in a meal. Getting to know which fruits are more
economical is useful, too. For example, bananas tend to be much cheaper than apples, which tend to
be much cheaper than berries, unless they happen to be on sale.
      It is possible to buy quality, locally grown organic produce less expensively. Look for pick-
your-own farms near you. Often the prices for produce you pick yourself are very reasonable
(because you’re doing the labor of harvesting). Becoming familiar with the edible plants that grow
wild near you is another option. (Be careful with mushrooms, though, since misidentifying mushrooms
can be very dangerous.) You can also show up at your farmers’ market at closing time: many farmers
will offer a discount on what’s left, but sometimes you need to ask. Another strategy is to buy
“bruisies,” or seconds, which is the produce that might be a little bruised, scabbed, or have the
occasional worm or bird-beak hole. You can usually get seconds heavily discounted or even free, but
you will typically have to eat (or cook and freeze) them that day because seconds won’t store well.
It’s also good to develop a relationship with your favorite farmers. Many will give you good deals if
they know that budget is a concern. Some will even trade you produce for labor on their farm if that’s
an option for you, or barter in other ways. They are also a great resource for advice on which
vegetables can most easily be grown in your backyard or in pots on a patio in your climate.
Healthy Fats

Your dietary fats will come from either whole-food sources (like the great DHA and EPA fats in that
salmon fillet you had for supper or from the avocado you tossed into your salad at lunch) or from
rendered sources (like sautéing vegetables in extra-virgin coconut oil or braising meat in pastured
lard). Since we’ve already gone over the whole-food sources, let’s talk about rendered fats and cold-
pressed oils for cooking.
      Rendered animal fats from grass-fed and pasture-raised animals are vitamin-rich and delicious
for cooking, including lard (the rendered fat from pigs), tallow (the rendered fat from beef or lamb),
and poultry fat (typically the rendered fat from ducks, but also geese and emus). When it comes to
cooking fats from animal sources, it’s very important to use the fats from only grass-fed and pasture-
raised animals (otherwise, you’re adding too much omega-6 fatty acids to your diet). These fats are
generally higher in saturated fat (although they also contain plenty of monounsaturated fat and
typically a good ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids).
      Some plant-based oils are also great for cooking. These are vegetable oils that can be isolated
from the plants easily using a process called cold-pressing. Coconut and palm oils are high in
medium-chain triglycerides (especially coconut oil, which is approximately 60 percent medium-chain
triglycerides, or MCTs). These saturated fatty acids have chains that are much shorter than those in
most in animal fats. They have diverse health benefits because they don’t require bile salts to be
absorbed in the small intestine (being passively absorbed, they enter the bloodstream very quickly
and can even be easily digested by people without a gallbladder). MCTs are rapidly converted into
ketone bodies by the liver. Ketone bodies are water-soluble molecules normally produced as
intermediates or by-products when the body mobilizes (accesses) fat stores. Ketone bodies (at least
two of the three types) can be readily used as fuel by every cell and are the brain’s preferred fuel
source in the absence of glucose or in the presence of insulin resistance (which is why supplementing
with MCT oil has been shown to be so beneficial in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s
disease). Coconut oil also has diverse antimicrobial properties and thus may be great for people with
bacterial or yeast overgrowth.



Good animal fats for cooking include:


     bacon fat
     lard (rendered fat from the backs of pigs)
     leaf lard (rendered fat from around pigs’ kidneys and other internal organs)
     pan drippings
     poultry fat (typically duck, goose, or emu)*
     salo (fat rendered from cured slabs of pork fatback)
     schmaltz (chicken or goose fat)*
     strutto (clarified pork fat)
     tallow (rendered fat or suet from beef, lamb, or mutton)
*Remember that even pasture-raised poultry may not have the best omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid
ratio, so these should not be the dominant fats that you cook with.




Plant-based cooking oils include:


    avocado oil (cold-pressed)
    coconut oil (typically extra-virgin, expeller-pressed, but also naturally refined)
    palm oil (not to be confused with palm kernel oil)
    palm shortening
    red palm oil
Is Coconut Oil Always Good?
Dietary medium-chain triglycerides have been shown to radically reduce the production of a variety
of proinflammatory cytokines, increase activity of the histamine-clearing enzyme diamine oxidase
(see here), increase mucus production, and support gut-barrier healing (by increasing cell-turnover
rate in the gut; see here). However, MCTs can also increase the secretion of IgA antibodies in
Peyer’s patches (see here), which may be problematic for some people despite all the other benefits.
If you have any reaction to coconut or palm oil, switch to other healthy fats for cooking.




      Avocado oil is fantastic for salad and vegetable dressings and for marinating meat, and it can be
used for high-temperature cooking as well. Extra-virgin olive oil is great for low-temperature
cooking (the less refined the olive oil, the lower the smoke point, but the higher the vitamin and
antioxidant content) and for salad dressings. Although olive oil comes in a variety of levels of
refinement and qualities, you will most likely use either extra-virgin or virgin olive oil. Extra-virgin
olive oil is unrefined, whereas virgin olive oil is semirefined.
      Two additional plant oils—walnut oil and macadamia nut oil—fall in a gray area. These oils
actually have very good fat profiles (especially macadamia nut oil, which is very high in
monounsaturated fats and is an excellent source of oleic acid; see here) even though they come from
nuts. The biggest issue with both of them is whether you are allergic or have a food sensitivity to them
(nut allergies and sensitivities are very common). So caution is advised, but most people will be able
to incorporate these oils into their diet. (They make great salad dressings!)
      With all these fat sources, getting the best quality you can is, I’m sure you can guess by now,
important. The more refined an oil is, typically the lower the vitamin and antioxidant content but also
the higher the smoke point (because naturally occurring free fatty acids are removed from the oil in
the refinement process). The smoke point of an oil or fat is the temperature at which the fat begins to
break down to glycerol and free fatty acids, which also produces a bluish smoke. Heating an oil or fat
to its smoke point damages the fat, and consuming this burned fat causes oxidative stress in the body.
It is important to be mindful of the smoke point of different fats for different types of cooking. As a
general rule, fats should be heated to a maximum of about 5°F to 20°F below their smoke point. The
following list shows the smoke point of the fats mentioned in this section.


Smoke Points of Various Fats and Oils
Fat/Oil                   Temperature
avocado oil, refined      520°F
avocado oil, virgin       375°F
coconut oil, extra-virgin 350°F
coconut oil, refined      450°F
lard                      370°F
leaf lard                 370°F
macadamia nut oil         410°F
olive oil, extra-virgin 250°F–320°F*
olive oil, refined        450°F
olive oil, virgin         375°F
palm oil                  450°F
palm shortening           450°F
poultry fat/schmaltz      375°F
red palm oil              425°F
salo                      370°F
strutto                   370°F
tallow                    400°F
 walnut oil, semirefined 400°F
 walnut oil, virgin        320°F
*Unless a manufacturer specifically tells you the smoke point of its olive oil, it’s best to assume
250°F.
     Lower-smoke-point fats and oils are great for braising and slow cooking and use in dressings,
whereas higher-smoke-point fats and oils are better for roasting, sautéing, grilling, and deep-frying.
     Just as it’s wise to eat a variety of meat, seafood, vegetables, and fruit, you should include a
variety of fats in your diet because different fats contain different vitamins and antioxidants. Also,
different fatty acids have different health benefits (or lack thereof). It’s easy to get hooked on a
favorite fat for cooking or for salad dressings, but you should switch up the fats you use and keep a
variety of healthy fats on hand at all times.

Budget Concerns

Getting quality animal fats into your diet is one of the most important aspects of the Paleo Approach,
and thankfully one of the easier tasks to accomplish. Many online retailers and local farmers sell
rendered grass-fed tallow, pastured lard, and pastured duck fat ready for cooking (or eating by the
spoonful). You can also easily and inexpensively render your own tallow or lard without any
equipment except a pot and a strainer: all you need is fat from quality animals. Simply chop the fat
into small pieces, heat over low heat for several hours until the fat has liquefied, and pour through a
strainer lined with paper towel or cheesecloth. Many farmers will sell you large pieces of fat
trimmed off their pasture-raised animals very inexpensively. (Think $1 to $2 per pound, and one
pound of fat will yield about one quart of tallow or lard.) However, talking to a butcher can be
fruitful. Markets often throw away the fat trimmings from meat if they cannot be added to the grind for
making sausage, in which case most butchers will happily put this fat aside for you and may not even
charge you for it. (Others will sell it on the cheap.) These fats can be stored almost indefinitely in the
fridge or freezer.
      Other quality fats (coconut, palm, olive, and avocado oils) can be purchased with coupons or
when they go on sale. And they can often be bought in bulk (especially coconut and palm oils, which
have longer shelf lives due to the high saturated fat content). When it comes to palm oil, it’s best to
look for manufacturers that follow environmentally sustainable practices. Olive and avocado oils
have varying shelf lives (it is best to keep them in a cool, dark place), so make sure to check the
expiration date.
Macronutrient Ratio




      The reason there is such a fierce debate about optimal macronutrient ratios (that is, what
percentage of your diet should come from fat versus protein versus carbohydrates) is that, bottom
line, when diets are composed of whole, nutrient-dense foods, health benefits accrue. This is
exemplified by both hunter-gatherer and hunter-gatherer-farmer populations (also called
horticulturalists), which are typically free of chronic illness. From the Eskimos, whose diet is
approximately 50 percent fat, 35 percent protein, and 15 percent carbohydrate, to the Kitavans of
Papua New Guinea, whose diet is approximately 20 percent fat, 10 percent protein, and 70 percent
carbohydrate, macronutrients don’t seem to matter as much as food quality. These peoples—whose
diets are very low in, if not devoid of, grains and very high in omega-3s—experience almost no
cardiovascular disease (even though 70 percent of Kitavans smoke!) or immune-related diseases like
asthma and autoimmune disease.
      In terms of regulating blood sugar, diets as low as 10 percent carbohydrate and as high as 55
percent carbohydrate have had positive effects on insulin and leptin levels and sensitivity and on
cardiovascular risk factors, provided that those carbohydrates come from low- to moderate-
glycemic-load foods. Don’t forget that insulin is a normal hormone and performs many key roles in
the body, including supporting the conversion of the T4 thyroid prohormone (thyroxine) to the active
T3 thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine). Although this is especially relevant to people with
hypothyroidism, T3 regulates metabolism and glucose homeostasis, which is important for everybody.
In fact, inadequate T3 production causes insulin resistance, which might be why people who eat very
low-carbohydrate and high-fat diets tend to have high fasting-blood-glucose levels. The wild card
here is protein intake.




Both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism cause insulin resistance.

     Some experts say that high fat and moderate protein consumption (which really means low carb
and low protein) has the most positive effects on insulin and leptin sensitivity (when you consume
excess protein, it can be converted into glucose via gluconeogenesis, which can increase blood
glucose and therefore insulin). By contrast, scientific studies prove that increasing protein
consumption (from 15 to 30 percent, with carbohydrate consumption at a constant 50 percent)
improves leptin sensitivity (see here). Can both be true? Yes. What this means is that eating to
regulate blood sugar (by consuming low- and moderate-glycemic-load foods, basically vegetables
and fruits) is more important than how much of your calories comes from particular macronutrients.
      While regulating blood sugar is important, ditching all carbohydrates is not necessary. To
reiterate, the Paleo Approach is not a low-carb diet; it’s simply not a high-carb diet. So a little bit of
insulin (which your body produces in response to eating fruits and vegetables) is beneficial, and there
is plenty of research confirming that high-dietary-fiber intake optimizes insulin and leptin sensitivity,
especially the fiber in low-glycemic-load foods like vegetables.
      Therefore, I don’t have an equation for the composition of your plate. I don’t care how much of
your plate is filled with meat and seafood or vegetables and fruits or quality fats. I do care that you
are eating plenty of vegetables (for the fiber, vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants) and enough protein
(0.75 grams per kilogram of lean body mass, distributed throughout the day, at the very minimum).
And I do care that your dietary fat comes from good-quality sources. Other than that, I want you to eat
what makes you happy and put your calculator away.




Ketogenic Diets
There is a great deal of passion both for and against ketogenic diets. These very-low-carbohydrate,
moderate-protein, and high-fat diets were developed in the 1920s as a treatment for epilepsy that was
not responding to other treatments. Ketogenic diets alter metabolism by increasing the level of ketone
bodies in the blood while decreasing glucose, mimicking the biological changes caused by starvation.
A proven therapy for epilepsy, short-to medium-term nutritional ketosis (from a few weeks to a few
months) can be beneficial for a variety of neurological disorders, and those with autoimmune
diseases that affect neural tissues may want to experiment with a ketogenic diet (in addition to my
other recommendations). Ketogenic diets were beneficial in animal models of multiple sclerosis (no
human studies have been done) and have decreased epileptic seizures even in children with both
epilepsy and type 1 diabetes. However, evidence supporting the use of ketogenic diets in humans with
neurological autoimmune diseases (or any autoimmune diseases, for that matter) is lacking.
     In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, a short-term (seven-day) ketogenic diet did not reduce
inflammation or any clinical or laboratory measures of disease activity, but a short-term fast did (see
here). And while the ketogenic diet did result in lower blood-leptin levels, it did not decrease the
numbers of total or activated T cells. Of significant concern, the ketogenic diet caused an increase in
cortisol (see here). Also, nutritional ketosis (or even simply very high fat consumption in a single
meal!) has been shown to decrease insulin sensitivity (see here). Following a ketogenic diet over the
long term may cause nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (at least it does in mice). Furthermore, when
vegetables are so strictly limited, you miss out on some very valuable vitamins, minerals,
antioxidants, and fiber.
     Studies evaluating the effects of ketogenic diets are limited, and even more limited in the context
of autoimmune disease. There just isn’t sufficient data suggesting that ketogenic diets, especially long-
term ones, are beneficial or even safe for those with autoimmune disease. If anything, the arthritis
studies indicate that nutritional ketosis may do more harm than good by raising cortisol levels.
Probiotic Foods


Consuming probiotics, either as a supplement or in the form of unpasteurized fermented foods, can
dramatically help modulate the immune system. Numerous scientific and clinical studies have
evaluated the effects of the commensal bacteria in the gut (those healthy bacteria that are supposed to
be there) and probiotic supplementation with specific bacterial strains on various aspects of the
immune system. The CliffsNotes version of the results? It’s all good.
      How probiotics actually work remains largely a mystery. We know that different bacterial
strains have different effects on the body and interact differently with the immune system. For
example, some probiotic strains stimulate production of cytokines (those chemical messengers of
inflammation) that promote Th1 cell development (which may augment the immune system to help
fight infection and prevent cancer).




      Other probiotic strains stimulate production of cytokines that promote regulatory T-cell
development, thereby providing that all-important immune-system modulation needed in autoimmune
disease. Yet other probiotic strains, including several Lactobacillus strains, are beneficial both in
diseases of compromised immune systems and diseases of excessively activated immune systems.
      We also know that probiotics interact with dendritic cells during antigen presentation during the
initiation of adaptive immune responses, meaning that probiotics are useful in preventing immune-
related diseases (see here). However, they also affect the adaptive immune system once it’s turned
on, so they can be used as a treatment for established immune-related diseases. (This applies to
immune-related diseases like asthma and allergies but also to autoimmune diseases.) In fact, probiotic
supplementation has been beneficial in a variety of autoimmune conditions, including autoimmune
myasthenia gravis, inflammatory bowel diseases, celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, and autoimmune thyroid disease.
      It has long been postulated that probiotic supplementation and the consumption of unpasteurized
fermented foods reinoculate the gut with beneficial strains of bacteria and yeast and that a healthier
variety of gut microorganisms is responsible for the probiotics’ benefits. However, new research
casts doubt on this explanation—at least in some cases. In a recent study of diarrhea-predominant
IBS, probiotic supplements did not alter the composition of the gut microflora, although probiotic
supplementation was still beneficial. This suggests that the benefits might be a direct result of the
interaction between those probiotic bacteria (and yeast) and the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (see
here) as they pass through the body.
      Probiotic supplements have profound effects on the gut microflora in some instances. For
example, studies have shown differences in the gut microflora of people who supplemented with
probiotics after taking antibiotics compared with those who didn’t supplement. Probiotics may also
have substantial effects on the gut microflora of those with bacterial overgrowth. Probiotic
microorganisms can affect the gut microflora through a variety of mechanisms: reducing the acidity in
the intestinal lumen (the area in the middle of the “tube” that forms the gut), competition for nutrients,
secretion of antimicrobial compounds by the probiotics themselves, stimulating the production of
antimicrobial compounds by your cells, and preventing adhesion and interaction of other bacteria
with enterocytes. In these ways, probiotics may help correct gut dysbiosis.
      Research has shown that beyond restoring balance to the gut microflora and modulating the
immune system, probiotics can directly affect the tight junctions between enterocytes in the gut—
resulting in decreased intestinal permeability. So taking a probiotic or eating foods containing
probiotic organisms can help heal a leaky gut.




      As mentioned in chapter 2, what you eat has a profound effect on the types, relative quantities,
and location of the bacteria in your gut—which is largely independent of the benefits of consuming
fermented foods or taking probiotic supplements. However, consuming probiotics has great potential
to speed healing and modulate the immune system and should not be disregarded when dealing with
autoimmune disease.
      Some researchers have taken on the task of characterizing the precise effects of each probiotic
strain (recall that there are approximately 35,000 of them) on the body. Some strains have already
been characterized as having anti-inflammatory and immune-modulatory properties, yet others have
been found to improve the barrier function of the gut or to reduce visceral hypersensitivity. It is not
unreasonable to expect that someday we’ll have the technology to tailor probiotic supplements to
address specific health issues. Until then, it’s best to focus on variety.
      Because different probiotic strains have slightly (and sometimes vastly) different effects (which
may also depend on your genes, level of inflammation, and current gut health), the best way to ensure
complete regulation of the immune system is to consume as many probiotic strains as possible. You
get far more variety from fermented foods and soil than you do from any supplement (which doesn’t
mean that probiotic supplements aren’t useful—see here for more information on probiotic
supplements).

What are good food sources of probiotics?
     raw, unpasteurized sauerkraut
     raw, unpasteurized, wild or lactofermented vegetables (kimchi, beets, carrots, pickles)
     raw, unpasteurized, wild or lactofermented fruits (green papaya, chutneys)
     raw, unpasteurized, wild or lactofermented condiments (relishes, salsas)
     water kefir
     coconut-milk kefir (milk kefir grains grown in coconut milk)
     kombucha
     beet and other vegetable kvasses


     When you ferment your own vegetables at home, the probiotic strains will vary from batch to
batch, thereby providing far greater diversity than you can garner from supplements. For example,
analysis of different sauerkraut fermentations yielded a total of 686 probiotic bacterial strains. By
contrast, most probiotic supplements contain between two and nine strains. The most common
probiotic strains in sauerkraut are bacteria from the genera Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, Weissella,
and Pediococcus.
     Fermented beverages, such as kombucha and kefir, contain beneficial strains of yeast in addition
to probiotic bacteria. Kombucha and kefir typically contain the beneficial yeast Saccharomyces
boulardi. Kombucha typically contains probiotic bacteria from the Acetobacter genus. Kefir (both
coconut milk kefir and water kefir) typically contains probiotics from the genera Lactobacillus,
Leuconostoc, Acetobacter, and Streptococcus (yes, there are probiotic species in the Streptococcus
genus, and no, they won’t give you strep throat). Kombucha and kefir cultures regularly contain
upward of forty probiotic strains.




Pre- and Postbiotics
Prebiotics are foods that we lack the digestive enzymes to completely break down ourselves but that
can be eaten by the microorganisms in our gut. They include a variety of fermentable sugars and
fibers. A recent study showed that the types of prebiotics you consume has a direct impact on the
composition of your gut microflora. We’ve already discussed how what you eat affects what lives in
your gut (see here and here), and this may be why.
     Postbiotics may just be the latest buzzword, but you will probably start hearing more and more
about them. What are they? Quite simply, postbiotics are the metabolites produced by probiotic
organisms. As discussed in chapters 1 and 2, many of the products of probiotic metabolism are
beneficial to health (for example, very short-chain fatty acids; see here). New research is being
conducted to evaluate the benefits of isolated postbiotic compounds on health in an effort to target
supplements for specific therapeutic benefits. (Currently, this research is being performed mostly in
the context of inflammatory bowel diseases.) It is possible that pharmaceuticals will one day take
advantage of these compounds with cocktails tailored to specific gut disorders.
      Some form of probiotic should be consumed every day. It is generally accepted that a small
amount several times a day is more beneficial than a large amount at one sitting—although this has not
been thoroughly documented in the scientific literature.
      When you first start consuming probiotic foods, it’s a good idea to keep the amount very small
(as little as one teaspoon) and see how you feel. Some people with severe gut dysbiosis may have
unpleasant gastrointestinal symptoms from probiotics (typically the same symptoms associated with
bacterial overgrowth; see here and here), including fermented foods. If you experience any
gastrointestinal distress, headache, skin changes, mood issues, anxiety, depression, stress, or heart
palpitations, discontinue the probiotics or fermented foods immediately. Instead, you can add these
foods to your diet in very small quantities after following the Paleo Approach for several weeks (at
least three). If one probiotic food doesn’t work for you, try another. If none work for you, you may
have more luck with a supplement or just might need more time to heal your gut before introducing
probiotics. It’s fine to follow the Paleo Approach, even for several months, before adding probiotic
foods or supplements (but do read the sections on poor digestion, probiotics, and SIBO in chapter 8).
If or when you find that you can tolerate small amounts of fermented foods, you can slowly increase
the quantity you eat at a given time over the course of several weeks, gauging portion size by how you
feel after consuming these foods (sticking with as little as one teaspoon or increasing up to one cup).
      An often-underrated source of probiotics is soil. Yes, dirt. Soil-based organisms (SBOs) have
not been as extensively studied as either Lactobacillus or Bifidobacterium bacteria. However, they
are normal residents of a healthy gut and have been shown to be potent modulators of the immune
system, and supplementation with SBOs has been shown to be beneficial in diabetes, chronic fatigue
syndrome, insomnia, and IBS. In fact, one of the biggest differences between the gut microbiota of
people living in Western cultures and hunter-gatherers in rural Africa (who have a much lower
incidence of autoimmune disease, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, etc.) is the presence of
soil-based organisms (specifically a phylum of bacteria called Bacteroidetes with a unique
abundance of bacteria from the genera Prevotella and Xylanibacter). This is certainly one area in
which the “hygiene hypothesis” is absolutely correct (see here). Our sterile environments deprive us
of exposure to soil-based organisms. You can buy soil-based probiotic supplements ( see here), but
you can also just play in the dirt (a good excuse to take up gardening!) or grow your own vegetables
(or buy locally grown organic vegetables) and eat them without washing them. Have you ever hear the
saying “You’ve got to eat a peck of dirt in your life”? Turns out, it’s true! OK, you can rinse off the
big clumps of dirt.
An Exception to the Rule
Most fermented foods contain some strains of yeast. These are probiotic yeast, typically from the
Saccharomyces genus. They have potent anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects in the gut
(reducing the growth of pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium difficile). Saccharomyces boulardii
is even included in probiotic-supplement formulas and is available in supplement form on its own.
Kefir and kombucha are particularly high in beneficial yeast, but yeast can also be found in
lactofermented vegetables like sauerkraut. Let me also be clear: eating foods that contain
Saccharomyces boulardii or other beneficial yeast does not increase the likelihood of getting a yeast
infection or overgrowth (a common misnomer). In fact, eating beneficial yeast can help treat a yeast
infection.
      However, as mentioned on see here, brewer’s and baker’s yeast are likely to cross-react with
gluten antibodies. The yeast in brewer’s and baker’s yeast is the strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
This is sold as “active dry yeast” for baking and is also used to make wine and beer. It is also the
strain in nutritional-yeast supplements. And it is found naturally in some kefir cultures and some
lactofermented foods (in smaller quantities than Saccharomyces boulardii). It is closely related to
Saccharomyces boulardii, although it has not been linked with specific health benefits. The issue
here is that if your body forms antibodies against gluten that cross-react with brewer’s or baker’s
yeast, you may have a food-sensitivity reaction to fermented foods. Many fermented foods contain
some Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae are
similar enough that cross-reaction may extend to these strains as well in some people. This is the
main rationale for introducing fermented foods slowly and cautiously (and for trying different types).
      If you suspect or know that you have a yeast sensitivity, most fermented foods may be a problem.
These reactions will typically be stronger with the fermented foods that have more yeast, like
kombucha and kefir, and less intense with fermented foods that have less yeast, like sauerkraut and
other fermented vegetables. If you have food sensitivities to yeast, probiotic supplements are worth
considering (see here).
      Another possible reaction to fermented foods is histamine sensitivity (see here). This will be
greater with lactofermented vegetables than with kombucha or kefir. Again, if this is the case,
probiotic supplements are worth exploring.
Navigating Spices


When it comes to spices, figuring out which ones are safe can be tricky. Many spices come from the
seeds of plants, some from the nightshade family. As a general rule, spices and herbs that come from
leaves, flowers, roots, and barks are not going to be problematic. Spices that come from fruit or
berries may or may not (because the seed is ground up with the spice) and should be avoided at least
initially on the Paleo Approach, as should spices that are overtly seed-based.



Safe (Leaves, Flowers, Roots, Barks)


    asafetida (check the ingredients list; sometimes contains wheat flour)
    basil leaf (sweet)
    bay leaf (laurel leaves)
    chamomile
    chervil
    chives
    cilantro (coriander leaf)
    cinnamon (cassia)
    cloves
    curry leaf
    dill weed
    fennel leaf
    garlic
    ginger
    horseradish (read the ingredients for horseradish sauce!)
    kaffir lime leaf
    lavender
    lemon balm (caution: lemon balm extract is a known immune stimulator)
    lemongrass
    mace
    marjoram leaf
    onion powder
    oregano leaf
    parsley
    peppermint
    rosemary
    saffron
    sage
    salt (Himalayan pink salt or Celtic sea salt is best)
    savory leaf
spearmint
tarragon
thyme
truffle salt (check the ingredients list for artificial flavors)
turmeric (caution: turmeric has potent anti-inflammatory properties but in large doses may also
suppress regulatory T-cell activity)
vanilla extract (if the alcohol is cooked off)
vanilla powder (check the ingredients list for corn, wheat, and sugar substitutes)




 Avoid (Seeds)



anise seed
annatto seed
black caraway (Russian caraway, black cumin)
celery seed
coriander seed
cumin seed
dill seed
fennel seed
fenugreek
mustard seed
nutmeg
poppy seed
sesame seed
     Be Cautious (Berries and Fruit)

     allspice
     star anise
     caraway
     cardamom
     juniper
     pepper (from black, green, pink, or white peppercorns)
     sumac
     vanilla bean




Common Spice Blends




In general, I don’t recommend spice blends because the ingredients list is often incomplete. (Why is it
OK to say “spices” or “natural flavors” on labels without being specific?!?)
     Some spice blends you might have in your kitchen and why you should be concerned:
    curry powder: typically contains coriander, cumin, fenugreek, and red pepper
    Chinese five-spice powder: contains star anise, peppercorn, and fennel seed
    garam masala: contains peppercorn, cumin seed, and cardamom pod
    poultry seasoning: often contains pepper and nutmeg
    steak seasoning: usually contains pepper, chili, cumin, and cayenne




      Avoid (Nightshades)



    capsicums
    cayenne
    chili pepper flakes, many varieties
    chili powder
    curry (typically contains red pepper)
    paprika
    red pepper




Other Flavorings
Spices aren’t the only way to add some pizzazz to food. The following products are absolutely
Paleo Approach–appropriate:
     anchovies or anchovy paste (check the ingredients list)
     apple cider vinegar
     balsamic vinegar
     capers
     coconut aminos (a great soy sauce substitute)
     coconut water vinegar
     fish sauce (check the ingredients list for wheat)
     fruit and vegetable juice (in moderation)
     honey, molasses, and maple syrup (in moderation)
     organic jams and chutneys (check the ingredients list)
     pomegranate molasses (in moderation)
     red wine vinegar
     truffle oil (made with extra-virgin olive oil; check the ingredients list for artificial flavors)
     white wine vinegar




      Another way to flavor dishes is with wine, fruit ciders, and distilled alcohols. While alcohol
itself is an issue, when you cook with these liquids, the alcohol cooks off (depending on cooking time
and temperature; see here). Provided that you are using gluten-free alcoholic beverages (which
generally means no beer or ale unless they’re explicitly labeled gluten-free) and cooking for long
enough, cooking with alcohol is well tolerated by most people. (Wine sensitivities include yeast
sensitivities, salicylate sensitivities, and sulfite sensitivities, so bear this in mind; see chapter 8.)
“What Can I Drink?”




    The single most important beverage is water, preferably filtered or spring water.
                      In fact, the only beverage you need is water.


  Carbonated and sparkling water: Carbonated water has a lower pH (it’s more acidic) than
  regular water and may actually aid digestion in those with low stomach acid if taken with meals
  (although it may irritate the gut if consumed between meals in sensitive individuals).
  Soda water: Soda water has a slightly higher pH than sparkling water but is still acidic.
  Lemon or lime juice: Lemon or lime juice may be added to water (still or sparkling) for flavor.
  When added in larger quantities with meals, it may improve digestion in those with low stomach
  acid.
  Homemade spa water: Adding sliced citrus fruits or citrus rinds, whole or sliced berries or
  other fruits, fresh herbs like mint or ginger, and even aromatic vegetables like cucumber can
  flavor water without adding much sugar. These can be very refreshing and alleviate boredom!
  Herbal teas (hot or cold):



      chamomile
      chicory
      cinnamon
      citrus rinds (often combined with other teas)
      clove
      dandelion root
      dried fruit (often combined with other teas)
      ginger (ginger tea is a fantastic digestive aid and may help modulate the immune system by
      inhibiting activated T cells and B cells)
      hibiscus (caution: hibiscus tea can lower blood pressure)
      honeybush
      lavender
      lemon balm (caution: lemon-balm extract is a known immune stimulator)
      marshmallow root (may help repair the damaged gut mucosa; see here)
      milk thistle (supports liver detoxification; see here)
      mint (caution: mint tea relaxes the upper gastroesophageal sphincter and can exacerbate
          acid reflux)
          rose hip
          rooibos (contains potent antioxidants and may actually help promote regulatory T-cell
          production and has been shown to improve colitis in animal models)
          turmeric (caution: has potent anti-inflammatory properties, but in large doses may suppress
          regulatory T-cell activity)


      Certain herbal teas, typically those that have medicinal properties or are marketed as
antioxidant, immune-support, or energizing teas, are made with herbs known to be immune modulators
or stimulators. These herbs or herbal extracts typically stimulate one helper T-cell subset, which is
why effects on autoimmune disease may vary. While the effects of these teas would be greatly diluted
compared with the extracts used in scientific studies, caution should be used when consuming them,
including astragalus (see here); ashwaganda (a nightshade; see here and here); echinacea (see here);
American ginseng (see here); grape seed; licorice root (see here); panax ginseng (see here); and
maitake, reishi, and shiitake mushrooms.


     Green and black tea: Green tea and black tea may be beneficial in moderate quantities (see
     here). Because of their caffeine, however, they should be consumed only in the morning (and be
     mindful about how they affect cortisol regulation and sleep quality). Also, studies have shown
     that their benefits come when they are consumed hot, so if you want iced tea, it would be better
     to go herbal.
     Coconut milk: Light or full-fat coconut milk may be consumed (see here). Just make sure it’s
     emulsifier-free (see here).
     Coconut water: Drink this only in moderate quantities because of its sugar content.
     Water kefir: Water kefir grains, which are living organisms, are grown in juice, sweetened
     herbal tea, sweetened flavored water, or coconut water. The kefir eat the sugars in the water.
     The result is a sparkling, fermented, probiotic-rich beverage (see here).
     Coconut milk kefir: Milk kefir grains, which are living organisms, are grown in coconut milk
     (which may or may not be sweetened). The result is a yogurtlike, probiotic-rich beverage.
     Kombucha: A kombucha SCOBY (aka mushroom or mother) is grown in sweetened green or
     black tea. The SCOBY (symbiotic colony of bacteria and yeast) eats the sugars in the tea, and
     the result is a sparkling, fermented, probiotic-rich beverage (see here).
     Beet or other vegetable kvass: Vegetables are wild or lactofermented (just as in making
     sauerkraut) and then juiced. The result is an acidic, mildly sweet, and mildly salty beverage rich
     in probiotics (see here).
     Green juices and smoothies: See here.
Food FAQs


You may have a few more questions about what you can eat. In general, if the food has a label,
you will probably not be able to eat it. Check the ingredients list and be on the lookout for
hidden sources of gluten, dairy, corn, soy, high-omega-6 vegetable oil, and added sugars. Also
watch out for nonspecific ingredients, such as “spices,” which often include paprika, and
“natural flavorings,” which can mean a variety of things. If you read a label and know that
every ingredient in that food is safe to eat, then go for it.




          “Don’t eat anything your great-great-grandmother wouldn’t recognize as food. There
          are a great many foodlike items in the supermarket your ancestors wouldn’t recognize as
          food . . . stay away from these.”
          —MICHAEL POLLAN
          “Unhappy Meals,” New York Times, Jan. 28, 2007




Where Does Coconut Fit In ?

Coconut is botanically very different from tree nuts, not because it’s not technically a nut (it’s a
drupe, but so are many tree nuts), but because the coconut palm is not technically a tree (botanically,
it’s more closely related to a grass). It tends to be much less allergenic than other nuts; it is much
lower in phytic acid than other nuts; it’s a good source of vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants; and it
contains some very healthful fats (see here). While the reasons to avoid other nuts and seeds mostly
don’t apply to coconut, there are some good reasons to keep coconut consumption moderate.
     Coconut contains phytic acid (see here) and is very high in inulin fiber (a high-fructose fiber; see
here), so moderation is required (except in the case of coconut oil, which is the pure fat from coconut
and does not contain either phytic acid or inulin fiber). What does this mean? It means that whole
coconut and coconut products can be used in moderation. In general, the more fiber the coconut
product has, the smaller your portions should be (because large portions of inulin fiber can contribute
to bacterial overgrowth).
     The highest-fiber coconut products (and therefore the ones that should be consumed only rarely
and in small quantities—think one to two tablespoons at most) are coconut flour and coconut sugar
(also known as palm sugar), which is as much as 82 percent inulin fiber (reports on the exact
saccharide makeup of coconut sugar vary).
     Products that are essentially whole coconut can be consumed more frequently but still in small
quantities (two to four tablespoons max). Make sure to buy these products unsweetened, including:


     fresh coconut
     coconut flakes or chips
     shredded coconut
     coconut butter (creamed coconut or coconut-cream concentrate)


     Most of the fiber has been removed from coconut milk, thus reducing but not completely
removing the FODMAP and phytic-acid content. Many people tolerate coconut milk very well and
even consume it daily (up to about one cup). If you buy coconut milk (as opposed to making it
yourself), make sure it doesn’t contain emulsifiers (which can be a challenge, since guar gum is fairly
ubiquitous in canned coconut milk; see here). Light and full-fat coconut milk, as well as coconut
cream (not to be confused with coconut-cream concentrate), are fine to consume.
     As already mentioned, coconut oil is a very healthful oil for cooking.


What About Green Beans and Snow Peas ?


Beans and peas with edible pods are usually considered fairly innocuous and are typically included
in a standard Paleo diet (see here). However, they should be avoided initially on the Paleo Approach
because they can still contain lectins (agglutinins in particular). When they are reintroduced, they
should be eaten cooked.
What About Fruits and Veggies Whose Seeds Are Eate ?


As a general rule, fruits and vegetablelike fruits whose seeds are eaten are typically fine to keep
including in your diet, among them berries, bananas, plantains, kiwis, kumquats, persimmons,
pomegranates, cucumbers, zucchini and other summer squashes, and the very small seeds in
“seedless” grapes and watermelon. However, keep these in mind as possible culprits if you do not
experience obvious improvement on the Paleo Approach. This is especially true for any fruit whose
seeds are big enough for you to break up with your teeth (like pomegranates and cucumbers). As
mentioned in chapter 2, these seeds contain protease inhibitors, and breaking up the seeds with your
teeth may irritate the gut (but you may or may not notice obvious symptoms). You can get around this
by removing the seeds (scraping out the middle of a cucumber or spitting out pomegranate seeds, for
example) or by avoiding these foods altogether, at least for a while, to help heal your gut.

How Am I Going to Bake ?
Baking is tricky, partly because there are very few “safe” ingredients to work with and partly because
those that are left tend to be high in starch or sugar and low in ability to bind (so they tend to pack a
carbohydrate punch and challenge the baking chemistry). However, we are human. We still want to
celebrate birthdays and job promotions with food. The point of the Paleo Approach is not to deprive
you of the joys of food or the celebrations of life, but to get you healthy. You will probably find that a
bowl of berries with some full-fat coconut milk becomes a decadent treat. Sorbets can be made by
simply puréeing your favorite fruit and adding it to an ice cream maker. For those of you who want to
try your hand at some baking, and with the understanding that this should be reserved for special
occasions because of the carbohydrate load of these foods, here is a list of safe baking ingredients:



Baking Fats


     extra-virgin coconut oil
     lard
     leaf lard
     palm shortening
     any other fat or oil listed on see here




Flours and Starches


     arrowroot powder
     coconut flour
     fresh plantain (green or ripe)
     fresh vegetables and fruit
     green banana flour
     kuzu starch
     plantain flour (check the ingredients list; sometimes this is mixed with potato starch)
     tapioca starch (caution: common sensitivity)
     vegetable powders (pumpkin, sweet potato, spinach, beet)
     water chestnut flour




Binders (Egg Substitutes)


     agar agar
    applesauce
    coconut butter
    coconut cream
    coconut milk
    gelatin
    mashed banana
    puréed pumpkin
    other vegetable and fruit purées




Leavening Agents


    baker’s yeast (common sensitivity)
    baking soda
    cream of tartar




Flavorings


    carob powder (caution: high sugar content)
    cinnamon
    citrus juice and zest
    cloves
    distilled gluten-free alcohols (rum, sherry, cognac—if alcohol will be cooked off)
    dried fruit
    flavoring extracts (check the ingredients list)
    freeze-dried fruit
    fresh or puréed fruits and vegetables
    ginger, fresh or ground
    mace
    salt
    spices (see here)
    tea (black, green, or herbal)
    wine (if alcohol will be cooked off)
    vanilla extract (if alcohol will be cooked off)
    vanilla powder (check the ingredients list)
Sugars and Sweeteners


     carob powder
     date sugar
     dried fruit
     evaporated cane juice (aka sucanat—look for organic)
     fresh fruit or vegetables
     fruit or vegetable purées
     honey
     maple sugar
     maple syrup
     molasses (blackstrap preferred)
     muscovado sugar (aka Barbados sugar)
     pomegranate molasses




     All these sugars are unrefined, so they retain their vitamins and minerals. Note that honey can be
problematic for those with FODMAP intolerance because some honey has a high fructose content.
Honey also has antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties, which might be
beneficial for those not bothered by high fructose content. Keep in mind that even unrefined sugar will
have an impact on blood glucose and that all sugars should be used in extreme moderation.

Egg Yolks

As discussed in chapter 2, egg whites are likely to be problematic for those with autoimmune
diseases. However, egg yolks, especially from pasture-raised chickens, may or may not be. Eggs are
a highly allergenic food, and food sensitivities to eggs are common. However, if they are well
tolerated, they present a valuable source of some important nutrients, including vitamin E, choline,
and DHA and EPA fatty acids (provided that the chickens are pastured). When you initially adopt the
Paleo Approach, avoiding eggs (including the yolks) is advised. However, once your symptoms start
to improve, egg yolks may be reintroduced with caution. (For more on food reintroductions, see
chapter 9.)

Chocolate

Chocolate is extremely high in phytic acid (see here) and omega-6 polyunsaturated fats (see here) and
contains caffeine (see here), all of which are reasons to avoid it on the Paleo Approach.
Carob

Carob is a commonly used chocolate substitute. While it is technically a legume, carob powder is
actually only the ground-up pod of the carob bean. Carob does not contain caffeine and contains three
times more calcium than chocolate. It also contains B vitamins, vitamin A, magnesium, iron,
manganese, chromium, and copper. Carob is naturally sweet, most of its sugars being sucrose (55 to
75 percent), with glucose and fructose each making up 7 to 16 percent. Other sugars (0.5 to 3 percent)
in carob are galactose, mannose, and xylose. All in all, this makes carob very similar to most fruit in
terms of sugar content. The only ingredient in carob powder should be carob. Unfortunately, carob
chips are often made with barley and dairy ingredients, so forget about those.




Ghee

Ghee is clarified butter, which is typically 99.7 percent fat, meaning that only trace dairy proteins
remain. Ghee from grass-fed cows can be an excellent source of fat-soluble vitamins. However, just
as trace gluten may be harmful to sensitive individuals, the trace proteins in ghee may also be
problematic. (Recall that dairy proteins are highly allergenic in addition to being able to cross-react
with gluten antibodies; see here and here.) Ghee should be initially avoided on the Paleo Approach
(with the possible exception of cultured grass-fed ghee, since culturing degrades the trace proteins).

Egg Substitutes
Commercial egg substitutes typically rely on emulsifiers and stabilizers to achieve their binding
capability (see here). They should be avoided.


Chia and Flax

Chia and flaxseed are often touted for their high omega-3 fatty acid content. However, as already
discussed, these omega-3s are in the much less usable ALA form (compared with EPA and DHA).
Flaxseed’s extremely high phytoestrogen content has already been discussed (see here). Both chia and
flax contain a lot of phytic acid (see here). In addition, the mucilaginous gel produced when these
seeds are soaked in water (the same gel that makes them such good egg substitutes) hinders digestion
(which means that these seeds feed gut bacteria overgrowth and you don’t get anything out of them
nutritionwise). Both chia and flaxseed should be avoided on the Paleo Approach. Caution should also
be exercised with other mucilaginous plants, such as aloe and slippery elm, as these have been shown
to modulate the immune system (see here).

How Long Does It Take for Alcohol to Cook Off ?


You need to be aware that unless you are cooking a stew or braising meat for several hours, some
alcohol will not be cooked off—how much depends on the cooking method you’re using. If you are
very sensitive to alcohol, even cooking with wine or flavor extracts like vanilla may not be good for
you. For most people, adding a cup or two of red wine to a stew that is simmered for three hours will
be fine.

Preparation Method                                    Percent Alcohol Retained
Alcohol added to boiling liquid and removed from heat 85%
Flamed                                                75%
No heat; stored overnight                             70%
Baked, 25 minutes, alcohol not stirred into mixture   45%
Baked or simmered, alcohol stirred into mixture:
15 minutes                                            40%
30 minutes                                            35%
1 hour                                                25%
1½ hours                                              20%
2 hours                                               10%
2½ hours                                              5%


Does Cooking Method Matter ?
In general, cooking food improves its digestibility. The more digestible the food, the more nutrition
you glean from it and the less is available to feed bacterial overgrowth. That doesn’t mean there
aren’t benefits in eating raw foods (see here), but for those with delicate digestive tracts, raw foods
may not be a great idea (at least initially). So does cooking method matter?
      Generally, cooking foods for a long time at a low temperature has the most positive effect on
digestibility while retaining the most nutrients. For those with severe gastrointestinal problems, it
may be a good idea to start the healing process by eating mostly soups and stews, braised meats, and
well-cooked vegetables (in addition to taking digestive-support supplements; see here).
      One area of concern for many people is high-temperature dry (no water) cooking techniques,
such as broiling, frying, deep-frying, and barbecuing. You may want to limit the frequency of foods
cooked using these methods because of a class of oxidants called advanced glycation end products
(AGEs) formed in the process. As a general rule, those yummy browned bits when you barbecue or
sauté are there because of AGEs. But in addition to formation during high-temperature dry cooking,
AGEs are produced in your body when sugar molecules (most often fructose) bind to fat or protein.
The resultant molecule can cause oxidative damage and inflammation and is generally considered one
of the major contributors to aging. Recall that some production of oxidants is normal and healthy and
that the body has various mechanisms to deal with them (see here). This is also true for AGEs. The
problem arises when we produce too many or when we consume too many in our food. The best way
to limit your body’s production of AGEs is to avoid excess intake of carbohydrates, especially
fructose, which you are already doing on the Paleo Approach. And while it probably isn’t as
important, it’s generally sensible to limit your consumption of AGEs. This means not burning your
food and not heating fats and oils beyond their smoke point (see here). Does this mean you can’t grill
a steak or eat roasted vegetables if they smoke a little in the oven? Of course not! You just shouldn’t
cook this way every day. Just as it is important to eat a variety of foods, it is important to cook those
foods using a variety of methods.
      Another concern for many people is the use of microwave ovens to cook or reheat food. This
arises mostly out of a misunderstanding of the type of radiation used in microwave ovens and
erroneous beliefs that microwave radiation damages the molecular structure of foods or creates
carcinogens. In fact, the opposite is true: cooking food in the microwave generally preserves vitamins
and minerals better than other cooking methods, reduces the production of heterocyclic amines (a
carcinogen) in meat compared with other cooking methods, and has repeatedly been documented in
the scientific literature as being entirely safe.




     The type of radiation used by microwaves is nonionizing radiation, the wavelength of which is
between common radio frequency and infrared radiation (a component of sunlight). This type of
radiation is fundamentally different from ionizing radiation (the kind of radiation caused by x-rays at
very low levels and by atomic bombs at extremely high levels). Nonionizing radiation cannot alter
atomic structure, composition, or properties. Instead, nonionizing radiation transfers energy to atoms.
In polar molecules—molecules that have a positively charged end and a negatively charged end,
which include water, fat, and some other molecules in food—this extra energy causes vibration,
which creates heat. Any chemical changes that occur in your food are caused by heat and are the same
chemical changes caused by other heating methods. Cooking foods, regardless of method, causes the
loss of some nutrients (see here), but many studies show that there is less nutrient loss in vegetables
cooked in a microwave compared with other cooking methods (owing to the fact that less water is
used in a microwave and the cooking time is shorter). This doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s better to
cook vegetables in a microwave; it just means that “loss of nutrients” is not a valid reason to avoid
using a microwave.
     Scientific studies conclusively show that microwaved foods are safe to eat, contrary to what
many websites would have you believe. The oft-cited “Swiss clinical study by Hans Hertel,”
claiming the contrary, was done with eight volunteers (two of whom were “authors,” and one of
whom later recanted), was never published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal, nor were the results
ever successfully reproduced (in more than twenty years). By contrast, rigorous peer-reviewed
scientific studies show that even repeatedly reheating foods in a microwave does not cause adverse
effects (except, I’m betting, in terms of taste!). While you should certainly be concerned if you have a
damaged microwave that is leaking substantial quantities of microwave radiation (for example, if the
door is cracked, in which case you should buy a new one), and while it’s important to use only
microwave-safe containers and bowls (no plastics!) for heating your food, you don’t have to give up
the convenience of a microwave.

What Do I Eat for Breakfast ?

Figuring out what to eat in the morning can be challenging on the Paleo Approach since most of the
standard American breakfast foods are not allowed. But there are still plenty of recognizable
breakfast options, including fruit, bacon, and sausage (made with Paleo Approach–friendly
seasonings). Kippers, a traditional breakfast in some parts of the world, make a very healthy protein
contribution. Sourcing quality, Paleo Approach–approved breakfast sausage can be tricky, but
fortunately you can DIY: just add sausage spices (minus red pepper, paprika, and black pepper) to
ground meat, form into patties, and bake or fry. And you can make large batches of sausage and freeze
it so it’ll be there when you don’t have time to cook.
      It’s helpful to let go of your notions of what you think breakfast should be. Instead of thinking that
breakfast is supposed to be a bowl of oatmeal, just look at it as the first meal of the day. The reason
eggs and cereal have become so ingrained (pardon the pun) in our culture as breakfast foods is that
they are quick to prepare. But this is true of many other foods that you might not typically associate
with breakfast, making them great breakfast options as well. It may seem strange at first to eat for
breakfast last night’s dinner leftovers or a bowl of stew from the vat you made on the weekend, but
you will soon find them comforting and nourishing rather than strange first thing in the morning.
Ready, Set . . .


You know pretty much everything you need to know to start changing how you eat to heal your body.
As important as detailed food lists are, the rules are actually very simple:


     Eat meat, poultry, fish, and shellfish
     Eat vegetables and some fruit
     Use quality fats for cooking
     Source the best-quality ingredients you can
     Eat as much variety as possible


      Depending on how you eat now, these may or may not seem like big changes. If you are eating a
typical Western diet, these rules might seem radical. If you are eating a Paleo or primal diet, all you
may have to do is switch out your breakfast staples. How to transition and what to expect, including
some of the emotional aspects of adopting a restricted diet, are discussed in chapter 7.
      You have probably noticed that I’m not a fan of counting calories, worrying about macronutrient
ratios, overly limiting carbohydrate consumption, or eating a certain number of servings of specific
foods every day. I don’t want to make you neurotic about what you eat or to turn you into a food
militant. The Paleo Approach isn’t really a “diet”; it’s a shift in perspective to support healing. If you
are stressed about food, that stress may cause more harm than the good your clean diet is providing.
So, within the guidelines presented here, eat what you enjoy, prepared however you like, and eat as
much or as little as you want.
      When deciding what to cook, start with familiar meals that can be made Paleo Approach–
friendly with relatively little effort. Your favorite roast chicken recipe might need a simple seasoning
substitution, maybe making your own poultry seasoning blend to eliminate pepper. Try truffle salt
instead of steak seasoning next time you barbecue. Make burgers, but ditch the bun and wrap it in
lettuce instead. Other simple changes are to switch out the fats in which you normally sauté or fry,
swap out arrowroot powder for flour or cornstarch as a gravy thickener, and use ingredients like
olives and fish sauce to replace the umami flavor normally provided by tomatoes. It doesn’t have to
be complicated or time-consuming.




          “Let food be thy medicine, and let medicine be thy food.”
—HIPPOCRATES
Summary Guide

All the foods listed here are great to include in your diet. Those that should be consumed in
moderation have page numbers beside them for easy reference.

Red Meat
• antelope         • bear                    • beaver
• beef             • bison/buffalo           • boar
• camel            • caribou                 • deer
• elk              • goat                    • hare
• horse            • kangaroo                • lamb
• moose            • mutton                  • pork
• rabbit           • seal                    • sea lion
• whale (see here) • essentially, any mammal




Poultry
• chicken • dove                     • duck
• emu        • goose                 • grouse
• guinea hen • ostrich               • partridge
• pheasant • pigeon                  • quail
• turkey     • essentially, any bird

Amphibians and Reptiles
• crocodile • frog • snake
• turtle
Fish
• anchovy          • arctic char          • Atlantic croaker
• barcheek goby • bass                    • bonito
• bream            • brill                • brisling
• carp             • catfish              • cod
• common dab • conger                     • crappie
• croaker          • drum                 • eel
• fera             • filefish             • gar
• haddock          • hake                 • halibut
• herring          • John Dory            • king mackerel (see here)
• lamprey          • ling                 • loach
• mackerel         • mahi-mahi            • marlin (see here)
• milkfish         • minnow               • monkfish
• mullet           • pandora              • perch
• plaice           • pollock              • sailfish (see here)
• salmon           • sardine              • shad
• shark (see here) • sheepshead           • silverside
• smelt            • snakehead            • snapper
• sole             • swordfish (see here) • tarpin (see here)
• tilapia          • tilefish (see here) • trout
• tub gurnard      • tuna                 • turbot
• walleye          • whiting




Shellfish
• abalone     • clams • cockles
• conch       • crab • crawfish
• cuttlefish • limpets • lobster
• mussels     • octopus • oysters
• periwinkles • prawns • scallops
• shrimp      • snails • squid
• whelks
Other Seafood
• anemones      • caviar/roe • jellyfish
• sea cucumbers • sea squirts • sea urchins
• starfish




Offal
                                                                       • certain bones (marrow and
• blood                             • brain
                                                                       bone broth)
• chitterlings and natural casings • fats and other trimmings (tallow
                                                                      • fries (testicles)
(intestines)                       and lard)
• head meat (cheek or jowl)        • heart                            • kidney
• lips                             • liver                            • melt (spleen)
                                   • sweetbreads (thymus gland or
• rinds (skin)                                                        • tail
                                   pancreas)
• tongue                           • tripe (stomach)




Glycine-Rich Foods
                                      • joint tissue and meat off the bone (trotters, duck feet, chicken
• most offal    • skin and rinds
                                      wings)
• cheek and
            • chuck roasts       • bone broth
jowl
            •           collagen
• gelatin      supplements




Leafy Greens and Salad Veggies
• amaranth greens • artichoke             • arugula
• asparagus        • beet greens          • bok choy
• borage greens • broccoli                • broccoli rabe
• Brussels sprouts • cabbage              • canola leaves
• caper            • cardoon              • carrot tops
• cat’s-ear        • cauliflower          • celery
• celtuce          • ceylon spinach       • chickweed
• chicory          • Chinese mallow       • chrysanthemum leaves
• collard greens • cress                  • dandelion
• endive           • fat hen              • fiddlehead
• Florence fennel • fluted pumpkin leaves • Good King Henry
• greater plantain • kohlrabi greens      • kai-lan (Chinese broccoli)
• kale             • komatsuna            • lagos bologi
• lamb’s lettuce • land cress             • lettuce
• lizard’s tail    • melokhia             • mizuna
• mustard greens • napa cabbage           • New Zealand spinach
• nopal            • orache               • pea leaves
• poke             • Prussian asparagus • radicchio
• samphire         • sculpit (stridolo)   • sea beet
• sea kale         • sorrel               • spinach
• squash blossoms • summer purslane       • sweet potato greens
• Swiss chard      • tatsoi               • turnip greens
• water spinach • watercress              • winter purslane




Stems, Flowers, and Flower Bud Vegetables
• artichoke        • asparagus                           • broccoli
• capers             • cardoon                             • cauliflower
• celery             • fennel                              • nopal
• Prussian asparagus • rhubarb (only the stems are edible) • squash blossoms

Alliums
• abusgata                • chives      • elephant garlic
• garlic                  • kurrat      • leek
• onion                   • pearl onion • potato onion
• spring onion (scallion) • shallot     • tree onion
• wild leek




Roots, Tubers, and Bulb Vegetables
• arracacha          • arrowroot           • bamboo shoot (see here)
• beet root          • broadleaf arrowhead • burdock
• camas              • canna               • carrot
• cassava (see here) • celeriac            • Chinese artichoke
• daikon             • earthnut pea        • elephant foot yam
• ensete             • ginger              • Hamburg parsley
• horseradish        • Jerusalem artichoke • jicama
• kohlrabi           • lotus root          • mashua
• parsnip            • pignut              • prairie turnip
• radish             • rutabaga            • salsify
• scorzonera         • skirret             • swede
• sweet potato       • taro                • ti
• tigernut           • turnip              • ulluco
• wasabi             • water caltrop       • water chestnut
• yacón              • yam
Sea Vegetables
• aonori      • arame       • carola
• dabberlocks • dulse       • hijiki
• kombu       • laver       • mozuku
• nori        • ogonori • sea grape
• sea kale    • sea lettuce • wakame




Vegetables That Are Actually Fruit
• avocado                       • bitter melon (aka bitter gourd) • chayote
• cucumber                      • ivy gourd                       • loofa
• okra (technically a seed pod) • olives                          • plantain
• pumpkin                       • squash                          • tinda
• West Indian gherkin           • winter melon                    • zucchini




Berries
• açaí        • bearberry      • bilberry
• blackberry • blueberry       • cloudberry
• cranberry • crowberry        • currant
• elderberry • falberry        • gooseberry
• grapes      • hackberry      • huckleberry
• lingonberry • loganberry     • mulberry
• muscadines • nannyberry      • Oregon grape
• raspberry • salmonberry • sea buckthorn
• strawberry • strawberry tree • thimbleberry
• wineberry
Rosaceae Family
• apple        • apricot   • cherry
• chokeberry • chokecherry • crabapple
• greengage • hawthorn • loquat
• medlar       • nectarine • peach
• pear         • plum      • quince
• rose hip     • rowan     • service tree
• serviceberry • shipova




Melons
• canary melon • cantaloupe                       • casaba
• charentais    • Christmas melon                 • crenshaw
• derishi       • galia                           • honeydew
• horned melon • melon pear                       • muskmelon
• net melon     • ogen melon                      • Pepino melon
• Persian melon • Russian melon (aka Uzbek melon) • sharlyn
• sweet melon • watermelon                        • winter melon




Citrus
• amanatsu               • blood orange               • Buddha’s hand
• cam sành               • citron                     • clementine
• fernandina             • grapefruit, many varieties • kaffir lime
• key lime               • kinnow                     • kiyomi
• kumquat                • lemon, many varieties      • lime, many varieties
• limetta                • mandarin                   • Meyer lemon
• orange, many varieties • orangelo                   • oroblanco
• pomelo                 • pompia                     • ponkan
• rangpur                • shonan gold                • sudachi
• tangelo                • tangerine                  • tangor
• ugli                   • yuzu




Tropical and Subtropical Fruits
• abiu            • acerola             • ackee
• African moringa • ambarella           • babaco
• banana          • biribi              • camucamu
• canistel        • ceriman             • chayote
• cherimoya       • coco plum           • coconut (see here)
• custard apple • date                  • dragonfruit
• durian          • fig, many varieties • gambooge
• granadilla      • guanabana           • guava, many varieties
• guavaberry      • ilama               • jackfruit
• jujube          • karonda             • kiwi
• korlan          • kumquat             • longan
• loquat          • lychee              • mamey sapote
• mango           • mangosteen          • maypop
• medlar          • nance               • papaya
• passionfruit    • pawpaw              • peanut butter fruit
• persimmon       • pineapple           • plantain
• pomegranate     • pulasan             • quince
• rambutan        • riberry             • rose apple
• safou           • salak               • santol
• soursop         • star apple         • star fruit (carambola)
• sugar apple     • tamarind           • ugni
• vanilla         • wampee




Good Fats
                                                                  • coconut oil (typically extra-virgin,
• avocado oil (cold-
                     • bacon fat                                  expeller-pressed, but also naturally
pressed)
                                                                  refined)
                          • leaf lard (rendered fat from around
• lard (rendered fat from
                          pigs’ kidneys and other internal
the backs of pigs)
                          organs)
• macadamia nut oil
                          • olive oil, extra-virgin             • olive oil, virgin
(see here)
• palm oil (not to be
confused with palm • palm shortening                            • pan drippings
kernel oil)
• poultry fat (typically                                        • salo (rendered fat from cured slabs
                          • red palm oil
duck, goose, or emu)                                            of pork fatback)
• schmaltz (chicken or                                          • tallow (rendered fat from beef, lamb,
                          • strutto (clarified pork fat)
goose fat)                                                      or mutton)
• walnut oil (see here)

Probiotic Foods
• beet and other vegetable kvasses • kombucha                     • coconut milk kefir
• raw, unpasteurized, lactofermented •     raw,    unpasteurized, •     raw,      unpasteurized,
vegetables (kimchi, beets, carrots, lactofermented fruits (green lactofermented        condiments
pickles)                              papaya, chutneys)               (relishes, salsas)
• raw, unpasteurized sauerkraut       • water kefir




Safe Herbs and Spices
•        asafetida    (check
                             • balm (see here)         • basil leaf (sweet)
ingredients)
• bay leaf                   • chamomile               • chervil
                             • cilantro (aka coriander
• chives                                               • cinnamon
                             leaf)
• cloves                     • dill weed               • fennel leaf
                                                       • horseradish (check ingredients for
• garlic                     • ginger
                                                       horseradish sauce)
• lavender                   • lemon balm (see here) • mace
• marjoram leaf              • onion powder            • oregano leaf
• parsley                    • peppermint              • rosemary
• saffron                    • sage                    • salt (Himalayan pink salt or Celtic sea salt)
• savory leaf                • spearmint               • tarragon
                                                       • vanilla extract (if alcohol will be cooked
• thyme                      • turmeric (see here)
                                                       off)
• vanilla powder (check
ingredients)




Beverages
• beet and other vegetable
                                 • carbonated or sparkling water
kvasses
• coconut milk (emulsifier-free) • coconut milk kefir            • coconut water
• homemade spa water             • kombucha                      • lemon or lime juice
• soda water                     • tea, green and black (hot, see • tea, herbal (hot or cold) (see
                                 here)                            here)
• vegetable (green) juices (see
                                • water                            • water kefir
here)




Pantry Items and Flavoring Ingredients
                                      • anchovies or anchovy
• agar agar                                                     • apple cider vinegar
                                      paste (check ingredients)
• arrowroot powder                    • baking soda             • balsamic vinegar
                                      • carob powder (see • coconut aminos (a great soy sauce
• capers
                                      here)                     substitute)
• coconut butter (creamed coconut, • coconut cream (see
                                                                • coconut flour (see here)
coconut cream concentrate; see here) here)
• coconut milk (see here)             • coconut water vinegar • cream of tartar
• fish sauce (check ingredients)      • gelatin                 • green banana flour
• honey, molasses, maple syrup (see                             • plantain flour (check ingredients:
                                      • kuzu starch
here)                                                           may be mixed with potato starch)
                                                                • tapioca starch (caution: common
• pomegranate molasses (see here)     • red wine vinegar
                                                                sensitivity)
• truffle oil (made with extra-virgin • truffle salt (check
                                                                • unrefined cane sugars (see here)
olive oil; check ingredients)         ingredients)
• water chestnut flour
Chapter 6
The Paleo Approach Lifestyle


          “Everything in excess is opposed by nature.”
          —HIPPOCRATES




Yes, eating a nutrient-rich diet devoid of gut irritants and proinflammatory foods is important. But it’s
not everything. As you read in chapter 3, getting your lifestyle ducks in a row is equally important.
Specifically, you need to prioritize getting enough quality sleep, managing stress, and getting a decent
amount of low- to moderate-intensity exercise. So how do you do that?

Addressing lifestyle factors can make you feel like a juggler. Yes, you need more sleep, but you also
need time to go for a walk. Which trumps what? And what about time for your kids? Or your job? In
many ways, these variables are impossible to address because the right equation will be different for
everybody. It is much easier to provide a universal prescription for diet than it is for lifestyle because
each person has unique challenges, responsibilities, and priorities.

This chapter is just a collection of ideas to nudge you forward on your journey to deal with lifestyle
factors that are affecting your autoimmune disease. The degree to which various lifestyle factors
contribute to autoimmune disease will vary from person to person. For you, it might be best to focus
on increasing sleep. For someone else, the most positive benefit might come from walking every day
or making time for mindful meditation. The changes you make to address lifestyle factors will be
different from someone else’s. How you fit these changes into your life will be a unique solution for
you as well, and one that you need to figure out for yourself.




Looking for More Resources?
Check out The Primal Connection, by Mark Sisson, for more great tips on making lifestyle
improvements for better health.
Each person also has personal hurdles to overcome. For you, it might be that you suffer so much pain
from your disease that you can’t be active or don’t sleep well. For someone else, a job may be so
demanding that it leaves no time for physical activity or adequate sleep. What matters is simply to do
the best you can given your circumstances (but also not to use the phrase “I’m doing the best I can” as
an excuse not to make changes you really could make). As your body heals, the hurdles you face will
probably get smaller, and you’ll be able to tackle even more lifestyle improvements. Healing is a
work in progress requiring constant adaptation as external factors in your life change (which they
invariably will) and requiring careful consideration as new opportunities and challenges arise.




Testimonial by Mickey Trescott
“After being given a diagnosis of both celiac disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, I was frustrated
that conventional treatment had left me feeling worse than before my diagnosis. My health
continued to decline, and I ended up unable to hold a job, much less leave my house. Since no
doctor was able or willing to help me, I took it upon myself to search for ways to help my body
heal naturally. That is when I came across the Paleo Approach. Initially I was put off by it because
I had been vegan for a decade and eating meat was unfathomable. I had tried raw diets, cleanses,
and supplementation, but they only worsened my condition. Even though it went against everything
I believed about nutrition, I decided to give the Paleo Approach a chance in an act of desperation.
      After a month, I started to see some changes. My digestive issues were gone, I had more
energy, and my joint pain started to lessen. With every passing month, I felt a little bit better. With
the inclusion of meat in my diet, I was slowly reversing all the long-standing vitamin and mineral
deficiencies I was suffering from. I learned that I was extremely sensitive to grains, eggs, dairy,
and nightshades, so much so that I decided to stay on the strict elimination diet long term. In
addition to the dietary changes, I started learning about circadian rhythms, the importance of
sleep, and stress-reduction techniques and how effective they are for managing autoimmunity.
Once I got the lifestyle piece put into action, my health started improving by leaps and bounds.
Within my first year on the Paleo Approach, I went back to work, completed a nine-month program
in nutritional therapy, started a blog, and wrote a cookbook for those who eat this way. My energy
is better than it was when I was a teenager! When I think back to where I was at the beginning of
this journey, I almost can’t believe I’m the same person.
      The positive effects of following the Paleo Approach keep me motivated to continue eating
food that nourishes and energizes me and to avoid those things that cause inflammation and pain.
As a foodie and a cook, I am always pushing myself to come up with delicious recipes that fit
within my range of safe foods. My largest challenge in my quest for better health hasn’t been
about the diet, however; it’s been keeping up with the lifestyle modifications that have helped me
get to this place. As I have regained my energy, the temptation to do too much is almost
irresistible. I am still learning how to prioritize sleep, gentle exercise, meditation, and getting
outside in favor of getting more work done. I am grateful that Sarah’s approach includes these
lifestyle factors, as they are just as important to healing from autoimmunity as a proper diet.”
      Mickey Trescott is the author of the e-book The Autoimmune Paleo Cookbook and blogs at
Autoimmune Paleo (autoimmune-paleo.com).
Managing Meals


Even though I want to talk about aspects of lifestyle, I’m going to start with food. Not what’s on your
plate (I think we’ve got that covered!), but the lifestyle angles, like where to eat, when to eat, and
whom to eat with. These things matter—partly because food (and shopping and cooking) will
probably be prominent in your life for a little while (at least until you become more accustomed to
this way of eating) and partly because we all have rituals and habits when it comes to food. Some of
these rituals are valuable and important to protect, but some habits are destructive and need to be
broken.
      For example, a ritual worth protecting is the family meal. Meals are an opportunity to be social
and to bond with people. Studies have shown that families who eat dinner together are closer and
healthier. Just because you are eating in a new way, and maybe even eating different foods than your
family, doesn’t mean you can’t make family meals a priority. Meal-bonding time can also extend into
meal-preparation time. Since it is likely that you will be devoting a larger amount of time to preparing
meals from scratch, this is a great opportunity to invite your kids, partner, friends, or even neighbors
into the kitchen with you. Making cooking a social activity can accomplish a few goals at once:
preparing food becomes more enjoyable, the time seems to go by more quickly, you get to share your
nutrition knowledge with your family and friends, you turn cooking time into downtime, and you make
cooking a valuable activity that reduces rather than increases stress. Even if you live on your own or
if your kids are too young to help out in the kitchen, preparing food can still be an opportunity to
unwind. Podcasts, audiobooks, good music, or a good friend on speakerphone can make the time
spent in the kitchen a delightful experience rather than a chore.
      Some bad food habits might also need to be addressed. Perhaps you’re used to eating in front on
the television, or you’re a late-night snacker. Maybe you’re used to not sitting down for meals but
grazing all day long. Maybe you always have lunch at your desk. These habits all decrease the
enjoyment you get from food because you aren’t paying attention to what you’re eating—and this
actually has repercussions for your neurotransmitters. Also, many of these habits can interfere with
digestion or your ability to manage stress or prioritize sleep. While addressing these habits may be an
ongoing project (no, you don’t need to do a complete makeover overnight, and yes, it’s OK if you
chip away at these recommendations over time), they all boil down to practicing good “meal
hygiene.”

Practicing Good Meal Hygiene

Certain habits increase the enjoyment you get out of your food and support optimum digestion:


     Sitting down to eat and focusing on your food
     Chewing thoroughly and not rushing through a meal
     Not rushing digestion or eating when under duress
      Of course, a few other suggestions may help as well.
      Distraction contributes to overeating. Not only does distraction affect how much you eat (like if
you’re watching TV or playing a computer game while eating dinner), but it also affects how much
you eat later in the day. While this is an oversimplification, it basically means that it’s difficult to
listen to your body’s cues (like whether or not you’ve had enough to eat) if you aren’t paying
attention. Successfully eating an appropriate amount of food for your body, which is important for
general health but also for healing from autoimmune disease, depends on being aware of your body’s
hunger and satiety signals. This means sitting down at a table to eat and paying attention to your food
and to the people you are eating with. If you are used to answering e-mail and watching a newsfeed
while eating, this can feel a little strange at first.




     It’s also important to take your time when you eat. Thoroughly chewing your food is one of the
best ways to support optimal digestion. Chewing is the first step of digestion, breaking food down
into small, manageable pieces while simultaneously mixing it with digestive enzymes (called
amylases) from your saliva. Chewing also provides a key signal to your gastrointestinal tract to
prepare for the rest of the process of digestion. Studies have shown that chewing thoroughly increases
production of cholecystokinin and glucagon-like peptide 1 (see here) and causes a greater decrease in
ghrelin (which means a greater sense of satiety). It also speeds up gastric emptying and increases the
buffering capacity of stomach acid.




Looking for More Resources?
For more information on the complex process of digestion, check out Gulp: Adventures on the
Alimentary Canal, by Mary Roach.



      When you take the time to chew your food thoroughly, you also need less liquid to “wash it
down.” This aids digestion because drinking excessive liquid with your meals can dilute your
stomach acid, bile salts, and digestive enzymes, rendering the digestive process less efficient. As a
general rule, try to limit yourself to one small glass of water or other liquid with your meals, but
increase your fluid consumption between meals and upon waking in the morning to make sure you are
adequately hydrated.
      While it’s important to sit and relax while you eat, it’s also important not to dash out the door as
soon as you’re done. Digestion is work, and anything that might increase cortisol (like your morning
commute) or divert blood flow away from your internal organs (like your workout at the gym) will
negatively impact digestion. There’s a reason people tend to feel sleepy after a big meal (recall that
melatonin regulates digestion; see here)—resting is conducive to digesting. Try to organize your
mealtimes so that you don’t have to get up from the table as soon as you’re finished (or if you do get
up from the table, it’s only to move to somewhere else equally peaceful). This doesn’t mean that you
have to avoid doing the dishes or that you need to lie down or nap after you eat—just try to make sure
that your next activity is calm and enjoyable and doesn’t cause physical or psychological stress.
      Eating while under psychological stress has been shown to inhibit the activity of digestive
enzymes. Yes, stress alone can hinder digestion (and thereby feed gut dysbiosis). If you are upset or
unusually stressed during your normal mealtime, it’s actually better to delay eating until you have had
the opportunity to address your stress level (either by dealing with the stressor itself or perhaps by
practicing mindful meditation; see here). If chronic stress is an issue for you, using digestive-support
supplements to aid digestion until your stress management improves will be very helpful (see here).

Changing Meal Frequency

If you are used to grazing, reducing meal frequency may be one of your biggest challenges in adopting
the Paleo Approach (see here). Switching from five or six small meals a day to two or three large
ones may be quite a shock to your system; in fact, many people report that this is one of the hardest
habits to break (as it was for me). However, giving up snacking can actually be very liberating. As
you struggle to find more time for cooking, more time to relax and enjoy your meals, and more time
for sleep and physical activity, it really helps if you are not using that time to eat constantly.
      You don’t need to make this change cold turkey; in fact, radically altering meal frequency can be
hugely stressful. Instead, work on eating larger meals every time you eat and waiting until you are
truly hungry before eating again. As your body gets used to digesting bigger and bigger meals and
feels more comfortable with more time passing between meals, you will find that decreasing meal
frequency happens naturally. Eventually, feeling a little hungry will be a very comfortable sensation.
Even feeling very hungry will feel like a normal, healthful message from your body and not a cause
for panic.
      You should not undertake this change until your stress levels are under control and you have
adequately prioritized sleep. If your cortisol is not well regulated, increasing the time between meals
can increase cortisol levels even more. As you space your meals further apart, watch for signs of
cortisol dysregulation, such as sugar or fat cravings, headaches, fatigue, weight gain (especially in the
abdomen), trouble sleeping, not feeling rested in the morning, and having to pee in the middle of the
night (especially if it’s more than once). Some tricks to help your body adjust to decreased meal
frequency include taking a spoonful of coconut oil or MCT oil (a medium-chain-triglyceride
supplement derived from coconut oil) between meals, amino acid supplements such as collagen or L-
glutamine between meals, working even harder to increase the size of your meals (and making sure
that they include protein, fat, and carbohydrates), practicing mindful meditation (see here), and
napping during the day (see here). If you still experience symptoms of cortisol dysregulation, it may
be better to increase meal frequency and put this change on hold until later.
      It might take a concerted effort to adapt to three meals and one snack a day when you first adopt
the Paleo Approach. However, you may find that four months down the road, you just aren’t hungry
for that snack anymore. Maybe in a year, you will feel as if you don’t need lunch either, and you will
feel better when you eat a very large, balanced breakfast and a very large, balanced supper. Or maybe
your body will always feel better with three meals a day. That’s OK, too. Once your hunger hormones
are better regulated, it will be easier to interpret whether your body is truly hungry and truly full.
      The takeaway is that eating larger meals less frequently is generally better. If you are currently
grazing, it is absolutely appropriate to tackle this transition slowly over the next few weeks or even
months.
Manage Your Stress


          “The greatest weapon against stress is our ability to choose one thought over another.”
          —WILLIAM JAMES

Actively managing stress is a multifaceted and highly individual challenge. It involves a vast
spectrum of stressors, each with its own effects and its own solutions. Your health, your individual
priorities, your responsibilities, and your preferences will all influence how you address stress.
Again, this section is designed to give you a starting point. Think of it as a brainstorming session to
give you ideas about what changes you can make to simplify your life and both relieve stress and
better cope with it.
     Strategies to manage stress fall into two overarching categories:


     Decreasing the number and severity of stressors in your life
     Increasing your resilience (or decreasing the effect that stressors have on you)


     The best place to start is probably with this phrase:
                                       It’s OK if you can’t do it all.
     Yes, I know you read that and didn’t believe me. I’m the same way. I truly want to do it all and
constantly struggle with setting boundaries for myself to protect my health. Whenever you are faced
with a choice, it’s helpful to say to yourself, “It’s OK to say no.” In fact, many of the stress-reducing
ideas in this section amount to choosing to do less. In a similar vein:
                                          It’s OK to ask for help.




     One of the best ways to manage stress is to ask for help. This might mean asking your spouse to
cook dinner a couple of times a week or asking your kids to set the table. It might mean asking your
neighbor or a friend to watch your kids so you can take a nap or get errands done more efficiently. It
might mean asking a family member to pick up your CSA box for you. It’s true that it is just easier to
do it yourself sometimes. It’s true that someone else might not do as good a job as you would. It’s
also true that that’s OK. It’s OK if your husband doesn’t clean the floor as well as you would have.
It’s OK if your mom folds your socks differently than you do. Heck, it’s even OK if the laundry
doesn’t get folded at all.
     A big part of being able to ask for help (and getting it) is having a good support network. As
discussed in chapter 3, social connection is key for mental health and stress management. Part of
having a functional support network is actively choosing the people in it. If there are people in your
life who are not supportive, who undermine your efforts to heal (either subversively or overtly), or
who simply cause more stress than they alleviate, you can choose not to have those people in your
life. Yes, navigating family (and friend) politics can be tricky, and each situation has its unique
challenges. But limiting the presence of negative people in your life as much as possible (you don’t
necessarily have to totally cut them off) will significantly decrease your stress.
      Reducing stressors in your life is often difficult because it entails external forces that you have
the least control over. However, taking a good, hard look at what is causing stress in your life is a
worthwhile exercise. The next step is to recognize what you have the power to change and what you
don’t, and so must accept.
      Job stressors can be some of the hardest to address, but since most of us spend so many of our
waking hours at work, it’s a good place to start. Most people, even if they love their jobs, still find
working to be, well, work. And the physical stress that sitting at a desk all day has on the body can
further impact your health negatively. Look for ways to reduce your physical and psychological stress
at work. Maybe you can get a deadline extension or change your schedule so that you can grab some
extra sleep in the morning. Maybe you’ve been working long hours to “get ahead” but no one really
expects you to, so you can reduce your work hours without serious consequences. Maybe your boss
will pay for your gym membership so that you can squeeze in a workout at lunch or buy you a standing
desk or treadmill desk to increase your activity level during the workday. Any positive changes you
can make at work will make a difference. It doesn’t hurt to ponder the possibilities. And it doesn’t
hurt to ask!
      However, not everyone has the luxury of a flexible schedule or the ability to lighten a workload.
Maybe it seems next to impossible to avoid getting sucked into a dysfunctional dynamic. Maybe the
person you share a cubicle with is an energy drain. Yes, bills do need to be paid. And, yes, getting a
better job with a more flexible and understanding employer is not always realistic. But there are
things you can do to minimize psychological and physical stress on the job:

    Take a few moments for deep breathing or to stretch during the day. Even if it’s only thirty
seconds of looking away from your computer screen, standing up, doing a few shoulder rolls and then
reaching your arms overhead and taking three or four deep breaths, it will help. Apps for your phone
and computer can be used to set reminders to take these mini-breaks. A good place to start is a thirty-
second break every ten minutes.




Looking for More Resources?
For more information on primal posture, check out 8 Steps to a Pain-Free Back, by Esther
Gokhale.
     Maintain good posture. A great resource for proper posture is the book 8 Steps to a Pain-Free
Back, by Esther Gokhale, who maintains that a J-shape is more natural and healthful for your spine
than the more traditionally taught S-shape. You can achieve this J-shape by tilting your pelvis forward
(this is called an anteverted pelvis and is different from the pelvic tuck that you’ve probably been
told is proper posture). Initially this might feel a little like sticking your butt out to look at your toes.
Pelvis anteversion provides the benefit of enabling you to maintain a straight middle and upper spine
without tensing your back muscles. (8 Steps to a Pain-Free Back includes many exercises to help you
align your spine this way, whether sitting, standing, or lying down.) Your computer monitor should be
at eye level, and your keyboard shouldn’t be higher than your elbows. If possible, spend time at a
standing desk or walking at a treadmill desk. If you have a job that requires standing for long periods,
make sure to wear good shoes that ideally support the natural movement of your feet (minimalist
footwear, natural-movement shoes, or barefoot-style running shoes—yes, this means no high heels). If
you need to, set reminders on your smartphone or write a reminder note where it will catch your eye
to check your posture (this is especially helpful if you are retraining yourself in exactly what good
posture is). This gets easier and more natural over time.




   Find excuses to get up and move. Sitting for prolonged periods can be intense physically and is
associated with a variety of illnesses, including cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes (no
matter how active you are when you get home from your desk job). Fortunately, moving around even
for two minutes out of every forty will negate most of the detrimental effects of prolonged sitting.
Maybe those papers need to be taken to someone else’s office on a different floor: use the stairs!
Maybe your water bottle needs to be refilled. Maybe the office needs someone to pick up everyone’s
lunch orders (even though you brought your lunch). Maybe you park a little farther away so you have
to walk a bit more going to and leaving work.

    Leave your work at work. As much as possible, don’t answer work phone calls or e-mails when
you get home, don’t agree to meetings outside your normal work hours unless you get to go home early
on another day to compensate, and don’t work in the evenings to “catch up” or “get ahead” unless it
will greatly reduce your job-related stress in the long run. As much as possible, emotionally
disassociate yourself from the office politics and social dramas that are part of your workday. Once
you get home, let go of whatever happened.

    Focus on stress-relieving activities before and after work. If you can’t change how stressful
your job is, then it’s extra important to fit in fun activities the rest of your day.
     This last point is what I’m going to focus on now— small or big things you can do to decrease
the effect that stress has on your body. These are changes you can make that will help you cope with
the stressors you can’t do anything about and boost your resilience.
      Resilience is the ability to adapt successfully in the face of stress and adversity. This doesn’t
mean that stressful events don’t affect you, but rather that you can handle them without the wheels
falling off your cart. Certain qualities are recognized to make a person more resilient:

Psychosocial Characteristics of Resilience
Realistic optimism
Active coping and high coping self-efficacy
High cognitive functioning and autonomy
Planning, motivation, positive risk-taking
Strong cognitive reappraisal and emotion regulation
Secure attachment, trust
Strong social skills and social network
Self-confidence, positive identity
Religious belief that gives life meaning
Humor, positive thinking
Altruism, generosity
Adapted from G. Wu et al., “Understanding Resilience,” Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 7 (February 15, 2013): 10.
     You may read this list and think, “Yep, I’ve got that covered,” or you might think, “Well,
jeepers, there’s my problem.” You don’t need to have every characteristic in this list to successfully
navigate life’s ups and downs. Being resilient is about more than just personality traits. It’s also about
coping strategies, establishing healthful routines, and finding a positive attitude with which to
approach life. This last point is up to you, but I can offer you some coping strategies and suggest some
stress-relieving activities to incorporate into your daily life.




Have Fun
Making time to have fun is the most powerful thing you can do to reduce stress. So many of us get
stuck in the daily grind of work, commuting, chores, looking after the kids or our parents, cooking,
cleaning, and running errands that we forget to take time for ourselves to do something we enjoy.
Sometimes we’re so busy and distracted that even when we are doing something we love, we don’t
appreciate or have fun doing it.
     It’s important to carve out time every single day to do something fun, whatever fun is for you.
Maybe it means feeding the birds. Maybe it means reading a novel, listening to your favorite podcast,
or watching a TV show or movie. Maybe it means just being a little silly. For example, maybe you
can teach your kids new jokes over the supper table. Or sing goofy songs while your kids are in the
bath. (We love to make up nonsense words to “Rock-a-bye Baby,” the current favorite version being
“Rock-a-bye Noses”!) My personal favorite is to have a spontaneous three-minute dance party with
my kids, which seems to help reset everyone’s mood (not just mine).

          “Laughter is the best medicine.”
           —PROVERB
     Just the acts of smiling and laughing can reduce stress and improve mood. Smiling and laughing
activate the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, which produces endorphins. Endorphins are opioid
peptides that function as neurotransmitters. They are naturally produced in response to exercise,
excitement, love, and orgasm and are associated with a feeling of happiness and euphoria. They
suppress pain through mechanisms similar to analgesia. And even more important, endorphins
increase the release of dopamine. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter with many functions in the brain,
including reward-based learning, inhibiting negative emotions, boosting mood, improving sleep
quality, and increasing motivation, cognition, and memory.
     Smiling and laughing also activate parts of the limbic system of the brain, specifically the
amygdala and the hippocampus. (Recall the importance of this area of the brain in the HPA axis; see
here.) The limbic system is a primitive part of the brain that is involved in emotions and helps us with
basic functions necessary for survival. When the limbic system is activated, serotonin levels are
increased, contributing to feelings of well-being and happiness. There are further effects on the
autonomic nervous system, which balances blood-pressure levels, heartbeat, and respiration. Smiling
and laughing also lower blood-sugar levels after a meal, help regulate the immune system, reduce
muscle tension, and, crucially, reduce cortisol, growth hormone, and catecholamines (see here).
     As you might expect, laughing and smiling work through the same pathways, but laughing is more
powerful than smiling. What might surprise you is that even a fake smile and a fake laugh can have a
positive effect on your mood, stress level, immune system, vascular health, digestive health, and even
your blood-sugar regulation (although the real thing is clearly more fun!). In fact, maintaining a fake
smile through a stressful task decreases the body’s stress response and improves recovery from
stress. This effect is even greater when the smile is genuine. The converse is also true: frowning can
exacerbate depression. Even if you don’t feel like smiling, forcing your facial muscles into a smile
causes the same (albeit at a lower level) body and brain chemistry changes as a real smile or laugh.
This means that forcing a smile will actually make you feel happier and reduce your stress!
     Having fun should be something that permeates your day. How you do this is up to you.
However, it might be as simple as remembering to find joy in the small things. Maybe it’s taking a
moment to appreciate a hug from your child, smelling his hair, noticing the warmth of his body and the
smoothness of his skin. Maybe it’s taking a moment to savor that cup of herbal tea, the warmth of the
mug in your hand, the aroma of the steam, the taste as you drink it. Maybe it’s smiling and saying a
cheerful hello to your neighbor, your colleague at work, or the cashier at the grocery store while
making eye contact. Maybe it’s laughing at a joke until your belly hurts and tears are streaming down
your cheeks.

Enjoy and Connect with Nature

Studies show that the sights, sounds, smells, and textures of the outdoors all have positive effects on
the body and the brain. This includes being in wilderness-type nature, such as going for a walk in the
woods or sitting on the beach and watching the waves, but also tamed nature, like sitting in a tranquil
garden or looking at an amazing view of the mountains from a balcony. Even walking in your
backyard in your bare feet or standing still for a minute to listen to the birds after dropping your child
off at school can decrease stress and impart a feeling of peace. If you live in the city, finding a
rooftop garden or park to visit or growing a few herbs on your windowsill can provide a connection
to nature.




     One way to get the most out of your connection to nature is to take a minute to acknowledge the
sensations wherever you are. Stop and think about the feeling of the air on your skin, the scents you
smell, the colors and organic shapes you see, the sounds you hear, and the textures around you. Take a
minute to put your hands in the dirt or feel the soft moss or let sand run through your fingers. If
possible, take off your shoes and feel the ground beneath your feet, making note of whether it feels
hard or soft, cool or warm, damp or dry. This is called “being present.” It is a form of meditation.
Clearly, everyone’s access to nature is different. But it is worth taking advantage of opportunities to
connect with nature when you have them.
     One way to connect with nature is to play in the dirt. This is one area where the hygiene
hypothesis (see here) definitely has it right. Exposure to soil-based organisms, both topical (like
digging your hands into rich, fertile soil) and ingested (see here), can be extremely beneficial. This
might just mean growing some potted plants on your windowsill or your balcony. It might mean taking
up gardening. Or it might mean taking the opportunity to get dirty when you’re, say, in the woods.
Playing in good-quality organic dirt and not worrying about washing your hands (even before you
eat!) is good for you.
      Spending time outside, even if it’s not the great outdoors, can also help relieve stress by
supporting your circadian rhythms. The light-dark cycle (meaning that it’s light out during the day and
dark out at night) is a powerful signal to your circadian clock, and spending time outside during the
day is one of the best things you can do to protect your circadian rhythms, including evening melatonin
production.




Illustration by Rob Foster


Use Your Brain

Using your brain for fun intellectual activities, whatever that might mean for you, can help increase
blood flow to the brain, which is critical for resolving inflammation in the brain. This is important for
anyone dealing with gut-brain axis or gut-brain-skin axis issues (see here), because resolving
inflammation in the brain can be a very slow process.
      Intellectually stimulating activities come in all flavors: reading a book that’s challenging
(because of the topic or the style of writing or maybe even the language it’s written in), learning to
play a musical instrument, solving a puzzle (crossword, Sudoku, Rubik’s Cube, jigsaw), taking up a
new craft (like knitting lace), or getting down with some differential equations. (Please tell me I’m
not the only person who thinks that’s fun!) Maybe it’s rereading chapter 2. Again. Really. (Don’t
worry: my feelings will not be hurt if you don’t think studying chapter 2 is fun.) Even if your job is
intellectually demanding, taking ten minutes a day to exercise your brain can be very healthful.
Turn Off Your Brain

Meditation may or may not strike you as a likely subject of scientific investigation. However, it’s
been thoroughly documented in the scientific literature that both active meditation techniques (such as
yoga, tai chi, and even more strenuous martial arts) and mindful meditation dramatically reduce stress
levels and boost cognitive abilities.
      Active meditation helps manage stress. Beyond the benefits from the moderate intensity of the
physical practices, their meditative quality is linked to decreased depression and anxiety, improved
optimism, and reduced stress (and cortisol levels). If you are someone who has joined a gym in the
past only to have your membership card gather dust after the first couple months, try active
meditation. Studies show that previously sedentary adults are more likely to stick with yoga classes
than other physical activities. And yoga is generally more accessible (and can be adapted to
accommodate diverse physical challenges) for many people.
      Mindful meditation (sometimes called “mindful breathing practice” or “mindfulness”) may just
be one of the most powerful stress-management tools you can have in your arsenal. Besides the fact
that you can reap a huge benefit from it with a relatively short time commitment (studies show
benefits even with only ten minutes of meditation), it can be practiced anywhere at any time by just
about anybody. Essentially, mindful meditation entails sitting and focusing on your breath for a set
amount of time. Your attention is sustained by maintaining concentration on your breath so that your
mind does not wander.
      Mindful meditation is fairly simple. Choose a comfortable position, whether sitting, reclining, or
lying down. Keep your attention on your breath. You might find it easier to maintain focus by doing a
breathing technique that requires mental control (like equal breathing; diaphragmatic breathing, which
has been shown to reduce stress on its own; or alternate-nostril breathing, which is described on see
here). Or you can simply breathe as deeply and slowly as possible. Or you can “watch” your breath
while trying not to control it (harder than it sounds). As thoughts come to you and vie for your
attention, acknowledge them (“Yes, I know I have to do the dishes when I’m done” or “Yes, yellow
would be the perfect color for the kitchen walls”) and then consciously let those thoughts go and bring
your attention back to your breath. In many ways, mindful meditation is the practice of stopping
repetitive or obsessive thoughts. It may help you become aware of which issues truly need your
attention and which ones are less important. It may also help you become more in tune with your
body.
      You can practice mindful meditation in silence, outside with the sounds of nature, or with music
in the background (typically something soothing without lyrics). While studies generally show that ten
to fifteen minutes a day are beneficial, if you have only five minutes, you will probably find that it
helps tremendously with stress management and your overall mood. You can either block off a time of
day for meditation or do it as you feel the need throughout the day (or both). This past Thanksgiving, I
escaped to my bedroom to practice mindful meditation in the middle of preparing dinner because I
could feel my stress level and anxiety rising. Afterward, the chaos of cooking seemed much more
manageable.
      Mindful meditation has even been evaluated as an adjunct therapy in the context of a variety of
chronic illnesses, including some autoimmune conditions. For example, clinical trials evaluating
mindful practices in patients with cancer, fibromyalgia, chronic pain, rheumatoid arthritis, type 2
diabetes, chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple-chemical sensitivity, and cardiovascular diseases all
showed benefits (although sometimes modest). Meditative exercises have also been shown to
decrease oxidative stress and increase levels of two important antioxidants—glutathione and
superoxide dismutase (see here). One of the best things about this technique for stress management is
that nearly everyone can do it.


Small Changes Can Make a Big Difference

An almost endless variety of other small changes can make a big difference in your stress level. For
example, music can decrease stress: you may find that the simple act of playing a CD while you work
or do chores improves your mood (although heavy metal may not work, so experiment with genres!).
The flicker of a candle flame or fire in the fireplace may be relaxing, so lighting some candles during
dinner or while you unwind in the evening may bring a greater sense of peace. Aromatherapy is a
great tool to support relaxation: experiment with scents to find the one that has the most soothing
effects on you.
     Other small adjustments to your environment may be helpful as well. Change the sound on your
alarm clock to be less jarring—or, better yet, invest in a light alarm, which wakes you up by
gradually increasing the light level in your bedroom, often in conjunction with bird sounds. Switch up
your transportation route to work by, for example, taking back roads instead of the highway—it may
make for a longer commute, but one that is less stressful. Or take mass transit or participate in a ride-
share program or carpool. Perhaps you can walk to work or ride a bicycle and get some exercise
while eliminating the stress caused by sitting in traffic. Whatever works for you, especially if it’s an
easy change to make, is worthwhile.




Breathing Techniques for Mindful Meditation




Equal Breathing


 1. This can be done lying down on a flat surface (with legs straight or knees bent or even with a
    pillow under your knees to support your legs) or sitting up in a comfortable position (on the
    floor or in a chair).
 2. Inhale for a count of four.
 3. Exhale for a count of four.
 4. You can slow your breathing and inhale and exhale for a count of six or even eight as you settle
    into this technique (or just count to four more slowly). You can also try combining equal
    breathing with either diaphragmatic breathing or alternate-nostril breathing.




Diaphragmatic Breathing


 1. This can be done lying down on a flat surface (with legs straight or knees bent or even with a
    pillow under your knees to support your legs) or sitting up in a comfortable position (on the
    floor or in a chair). Place one hand on your upper chest and the other on your abdomen—this
    will enable you to feel whether you are using your diaphragm instead of your chest muscles to
    breathe.
 2. Breathe in slowly through your nose, letting your stomach expand against your hand as your lungs
    fill with air. The hand on your chest should remain as still as possible.
 3. Let your stomach fall back inward as you exhale, and tighten your stomach muscles to help push
    all the air out of your lungs (exhaling through your nose or pursed lips). Again, the hand on your
    upper chest remains as still as possible.
 4. Make your breaths as deep and slow as possible.
Alternate-Nostril Breathing


 1. This can be done lying down on a flat surface (with legs straight or knees bent or even with a
    pillow under your knees to support your legs) or sitting up in a comfortable position (on the
    floor or in a chair). Hold your hand in front of your face, palm toward you.
 2. Close your right nostril with your right thumb and inhale through your left nostril.
 3. Immediately close your left nostril with your right ring finger or pinky finger, remove your thumb
    from your right nostril (this involves a simple rotation of your hand), and exhale through your
    right nostril.
 4. Inhale through your right nostril and then close your right nostril with your right thumb, remove
    your ring or index finger from your left nostril, and exhale through your left nostril.
 5. Continue like this, one round of breath starting with an inhale on the left side and finishing with
    an exhale on the left (it helps to remember to switch nostrils every time you inhale), keeping
    your breaths as deep and slow as possible.




      Many people find stress relief in a “gratitude journal” or in “gratitude meditation” (more
technically called a “gratitude intervention”). These practices have been studied in clinical trials and
shown to increase well-being (as measured by mood, coping behaviors, health behaviors, physical
symptoms, and overall life appraisals). In either of these practices, you take a moment to reflect and
focus on things or people in your life for which you are grateful. In the case of a gratitude journal, you
write down those things every day. In the case of gratitude meditation, you take two to three minutes
to mentally focus on appreciating those things or people. (This can be incorporated at the end of a
mindful-meditation practice or could simply be part of your bedtime routine.) The idea is to focus on
small and specific things you are grateful for, although there is certainly no harm in feeling gratitude
for bigger and more general things. Pick a small number of things to focus on each day, say three to
five. It’s OK if some of those things are thematic (for example, how supportive your wife is may
make it on the list almost every day), but try to include specific events, emotions, sensations, and
small details from each day as well. The idea is that, by focusing your attention on the positive, you
can start to break the cycle of negative emotions and stress.
      There are any number of things you can do to nurture yourself and thus increase your ability to
manage stress—simple things like getting a haircut or a massage (or both!), taking a mineral-salts bath
(shown to be very beneficial for skin ailments such as psoriasis, but also helpful for relieving stress),
or buying yourself some flowers. Maybe taking a few extra minutes to brush your hair in the evening
or flossing your teeth helps you feel good about taking care of yourself. Find the things that make you
feel nurtured and incorporate them into your life as often as possible. And don’t underestimate the
cumulative effect that small changes can have. Small changes can add up to big benefits.
Protecting Your Circadian Rhythms




As already discussed, the strongest zeitgeber is the light-dark cycle (see here). This means that the
best thing you can do to protect your circadian rhythms is to be exposed to sunlight during the day and
to be in a very dark environment at night.
      So spend some time outside every day. Typically, the sunnier the day, the less time is required.
A good goal is a minimum of fifteen minutes outside during the day (although the more, the better).
Sunlight provides benefits both through its UV radiation (specifically UVB) and through its blue
wavelengths of light.
      Being exposed to UVB radiation from the sun stimulates vitamin D production (see here). Recall
that vitamin D is involved in the biosynthesis of neurotrophic factors, regulating the release of
important hormones such as serotonin (see here), and activates areas of the brain responsible for
biorhythms. In addition, cells throughout the body, including the skin and eyes, are sensitive to blue
light from the sun, which is strongest in the morning. When special cells in the retina are stimulated by
sunlight, they directly affect the pituitary gland and the hypothalamus (see here). This, in turn, directly
affects the regulation of circadian rhythms (and thereby sleep quality) and influences the adrenal
glands, which control cortisol production (regulating and generally decreasing cortisol production,
which is why many people find being in the sun relaxing). Other effects of blue-light exposure include
increased alertness, improved cognition, and boosted mood and vitality.
      If, for whatever reason, you can’t spend even this minimum amount of time outside, one option is
to use a light-therapy box (sometimes called a SAD light or bright-light therapy or bright-light box).
There are many types available, and the Center for Environmental Therapeutics (cet.org) has
guidelines to help you find the best one in your price range. Alternatively, spending some time on a
tanning bed may offer many of the same benefits. Light boxes typically focus on white light (there are
some blue-light-only boxes available, but they don’t seem to be any better than white light), whereas
tanning beds focus on UV radiation. Vitamin D3 supplementation may also be helpful when sun
exposure is scarce; however, it’s no substitute for the myriad benefits you get from the full range of
light wavelengths from the sun.
      The flip side to protecting your circadian rhythms is to make like a bat at night. This can be one
of the most difficult things to do because we are so used to turning on the lights when the sun goes
down so we can keep on going. Unfortunately, the amount of blue light in incandescent bulbs can
disrupt circadian rhythms by inhibiting the pineal gland’s production of melatonin (see here).
Fluorescent, compact-fluorescent (CFL), and especially light-emitting diode (LED) lights (perhaps on
your computer screen, TV, or smartphone) are even worse. (LEDs emit so much blue light that they
are being incorporated into glasses as a light therapy box alternative.) First and foremost, keep the
lights in your home as dim as possible once the sun goes down (which is great for your electricity
bill, too!). Another fantastic strategy for protecting your circadian rhythms is to wear amber (yellow)-
tinted glasses (sold inexpensively as amber-tinted safety glasses at your local hardware store or as
glaucoma glasses or blue-blocking driving glasses at most eyeglass stores) for the last two to three
hours before bed. These block the blue wavelengths of light while allowing you to see and enjoy your
evening activities. In fact, clinical trials show that wearing amber-tinted glasses during this time
dramatically improves sleep quality. Note that even if you wear amber-tinted glasses, you still need
to keep the lights low because your skin also has photoreceptors. Even exposing your skin to blue
light in the evenings can alter the circadian clock of immune cells.




Michelle Tam shares recipes and tips for being healthy and raising a family while working the night
shift at Nom Nom Paleo (nomnompaleo.com).

      Sleeping in a very dark environment is also important—the darker your bedroom, the better.
This is part of practicing “good sleep hygiene.” Blackout curtains can be very helpful, as can using
duct tape or something similarly opaque to cover any LED lights on baby monitors, phones, electric
toothbrushes, or whatever else. Even the display of your alarm clock may be a problem (another good
reason to invest in a light alarm; see here). Covering your clock with a semi-opaque tape like masking
tape will cut out most of the light but still allow you to tell the time. Wearing a sleep mask in a too-
light environment won’t do the trick: your skin needs to sleep in the dark as much as your eyes do.
      Other aspects of good sleep hygiene include sleeping in a quiet room (or using a white-noise
machine to block out noise), sleeping in a cool room, and making sure the place you sleep is
associated with sleep (which means that the only two activities allowed in your bed are sleep and
sex). Whatever you can do to make your bedroom a peaceful place will help you relax and sleep.




Looking for More Tips for Getting Better Sleep?
Check out Lights Out: Sleep, Sugar, and Survival, by T. S. Wiley.
What If UV Radiation Is an Environmental Trigger for Your
Disease?
For some people, such as those with dermatomyositis, sun exposure is actually contraindicated. Some
light-therapy boxes have UV filters, so these people can still reap the benefits of the blue wavelengths
of light on their circadian clocks. It’s also important for these people to be mindful of getting vitamin
D from food (such as by eating plenty of wild-caught fish, grass-fed and pasture-raised meat, and
wild mushrooms) or to take a vitamin D3 supplement (which can be taken on its own or in, say,
fermented cod liver oil). Make sure to get your vitamin D levels tested to determine the dose of
supplements you might need.



     A few other important zeitgebers are activity and food intake. The fact that you don’t eat or run
around while you are sleeping is a crucial signal for your circadian clock. This also means that it’s
helpful to eat your meals on a relatively regular schedule as much as possible. It is extremely helpful
to get outdoors during the day and to do mild to moderately intense exercise. It is also helpful to do
more strenuous exercise at a relatively consistent time (consistency is more important than the time of
day you work out). As much as spontaneity is great for emotional well-being, the body expects certain
physical stimuli at certain times of day, so having a fairly predictable routine when it comes to
activity, meals, sleep, and outdoor time can etch good grooves in your circadian rhythms.

Get Enough Good Sleep

One of the most important aspects of both managing stress and protecting your circadian rhythms (and
healing in general) is prioritizing sleep. As already discussed, getting adequate sleep is critical for
healing, for regulating hormones, for resolving (and preventing) inflammation, and for the normal
functioning of the immune system.

          “Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.”
          —BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

     As important as sleep is, it is one of the easiest lifestyle factors to give short shrift to as we
attempt to accomplish everything else on our to-do lists. Some of us have been depriving our bodies
of adequate sleep for so long that we don’t even know what “enough sleep” would feel like. It can
also be intimidating to contemplate having less time in your day. What do you give up to make more
time for sleep? The answer to this question is entirely up to you. You will need to assess your own
priorities and responsibilities to figure out what you can shift so that you can go to bed earlier.
     As a general rule, eight to nine hours of sleep every single night should be considered a bare
minimum (for most people, not just those with autoimmune disease, although some healthy people
might be able to get away with as little as seven hours a night). If you know that your sleep quality is
not great, aiming for more sleep than this is strongly worth contemplating. How do you get nine hours
every night? Just as your kids have a bedtime, you need one, too. Work backward from the time you
have to get up in the morning. Next, add at least half an hour to account for the time it takes you to get
ready for bed and fall asleep. (If you take a shower or have other more lengthy pre-bedtime rituals,
add more than half an hour.) Then figure out how long you need to unwind (do you like to read a book
before going to bed?) so you know when you need to start your pre-bedtime rituals (and maybe start
wearing your amber-tinted glasses).
      For example, let’s assume you need to get up at 6 a.m. so that you don’t have to rush to get ready
for work or get your kids to school on time. Now, let’s assume that your goal is nine hours of sleep.
That puts your “asleep time” at 9 p.m. Adding half an hour to change into your pajamas and fall
asleep means that your bedtime is 8:30 (although your goal may be to turn out your light at 8:45). If
you like to read before falling asleep, maybe you will aim to start reading at 8. This probably means
that your amber-tinted glasses should be perched on your nose by about 7. Yes, this is early. Yes, this
might even be before your kids are in bed. Yes, this means finding some time during the day for
everything you used to do between 8 and 11 at night. Yes, it means that some things just might not get
done. (This is a great opportunity to practice asking for help.) And yes, you’ll have to get used to
eating dinner earlier.




      The idea of going to bed early may be overwhelming. However, it’s important to understand that
getting adequate sleep is critical if you are going to function well during the day. If your body is
healing and you are feeding it nutrient-dense foods, and if your stress is managed and you are well
rested, you will have tons more energy and be way more productive.
      It’s also important to seriously evaluate how your time is being used and whether it is being well
used. Perhaps you watch a couple hours of TV after your kids go to bed. You might think about cutting
back a little or even not watching TV at all. Maybe you can limit how much time you spend on social
media every day (which most of us know can be a pretty big time drain). Maybe you’re used to going
out with your colleagues every day after work, in which case it may be a question of going out with
them only once or twice a week. Maybe you do all your household chores in the evenings, which
might mean asking someone to help or restructuring your day or week to get those chores done at
another time. Maybe your kids’ after-school activities eat into your evening, in which case asking a
friend to bring your child home from soccer practice may mean that you can, say, get dinner on the
table at a reasonable hour. Maybe freeing up time at night is as simple as planning ahead so you have
a meal ready to go when you get home. Once again, asking for help and seriously evaluating what you
can live without (Does the floor really need to be swept every day? Do you really need to work a
sixty-hour week?) are key aspects of looking after yourself.
      After you have figured out how to accommodate your earlier bedtime, the next questions are
these: How do you fall asleep, and how do you stay asleep?
     If you have trouble falling asleep, the strategies already discussed for protecting your circadian
rhythms and practicing good sleep hygiene will be very important for you. Avoid eating for at least
two hours before your “asleep time.” You may find eating tryptophan-rich foods ( see here, here, and
here) to be particularly helpful. You can also try setting up some relaxing bedtime rituals. Maybe it’s
applying a moisturizer that contains calming essential oils. Maybe it’s taking a hot bath. If you take a
magnesium supplement, taking it in the evening can improve sleep quality. Some herbal teas may help
you relax and unwind (chamomile is a classic, but any caffeine-free warm beverage can provide that
soothing stimulus for sleep). Avoiding caffeine during the day will also help. Most sleep aids are
contraindicated for those with autoimmune disease (see here).




What to Do If Your Disease or Other External Factors Prevent
You from Sleeping




Certain autoimmune diseases are marked by sleep disturbances, either because of pain, neurological
symptoms, or the need to pee in the middle of the night, as in the case of interstitial cystitis. Then
there are external factors, like a new baby, which might mean that a good night’s sleep, no matter how
hard you try to make it a priority, is simply not going to happen. If your slumber is interrupted or you
just can’t spend as much time in bed every night as you know you need, then napping is a very good
plan B. Studies show that napping after inadequate sleep the night before decreases sleepiness,
improves performance, and causes beneficial changes in cortisol and markers of inflammation.
      If all you have time for is a quick power nap, studies have shown that naps less than twenty-five
or thirty minutes long can be very restorative, improve cognition, and won’t affect your nighttime
sleep at all. The trick is to spend three to twenty minutes in stage 2 sleep and to avoid entering the
deeper sleep stages. There are four stages of sleep, each deeper than the last, characterized by your
brain-wave pattern in each stage. Most of the benefits of being asleep are attributed to the time you
spend in deep sleep (stages 3 and 4), plus the time in rapid eye movement sleep (considered separate
from the other sleep stages), which is when you dream. While a power nap can’t replace the benefits
of good-quality nighttime sleep, it can help you get through your day. After five to ten minutes in stage
1, you enter stage 2 sleep. After about twenty minutes, you enter stage 3 sleep, which is much harder
to wake from, hence the thirty-minute cap or the power nap.
      If you have more time to devote to a nap, sleeping longer than thirty minutes will get you into the
deep-sleep stages (stages 3 and 4). The best-case scenario with a longer nap is to be able to sleep for
at least ninety minutes. Studies with the elderly show that, while napping ninety minutes or longer
does decrease nighttime sleep, the twenty-four-hour sleep total is longer (and that’s the whole point!).
Plus, these same studies show that even napping in the evening does not affect the quality or quantity
of overnight sleep compared with napping earlier in the day, which is all to say that you should get
your sleep whenever you can. And you certainly don’t have to wait until you’re elderly to
strategically use naps to increase your sleep!



      If you have trouble staying asleep, this typically indicates problems with your cortisol
production or HPA axis (although some sleep disturbances may be related to hormones, in particular
gonadotrophins, which influence sex hormones; pain may also be a factor). In this case, working with
a functional-medicine specialist, a physician, or an alternative health care provider to assess cortisol
levels and rhythmicity may be beneficial. Herbal remedies to support adrenal function may help
restore a more natural sleep pattern, but many are contraindicated in autoimmune disease (see here).
It is also very important to avoid strenuous exercise, manage stress (try mindful meditation; see here),
protect your circadian rhythms, and get as much sleep as possible. (Naps may be a good strategy; see
above.)




What About Biphasic Sleep?
Biphasic sleep, or dividing your sleep time into two phases with a period of being awake in the
middle of the night, is actually not abnormal. The typical pattern would be to sleep for four or five
hours, be awake for one or two, and then sleep again for three or four. If this sounds like your sleep
pattern even after you’ve tried to protect your circadian rhythms, you can embrace it and schedule
your life to accommodate it. But it’s also important for you to prioritize even more time in bed (so
that your total sleep before and after your middle-of-the-night waking still adds up to at least eight
hours), which might mean aiming for ten hours or more in bed. If this is your natural sleep pattern, it’s
OK to read or get up and do something quiet in the middle of the night, but remember to protect your
circadian rhythms by wearing amber-tinted glasses and keeping lights very low (better yet, remain in
complete darkness and listen to an audiobook or use the time to meditate). In this way, you can make
use of your middle-of-the-night waking time but still safeguard your body’s ability to fall back to
sleep.




Is Taking Melatonin to Help You Sleep Helpful?
Studies evaluating melatonin supplements as a sleep aid are fairly inconclusive. (They appear to be
great for readjusting circadian clocks in shift workers and in the case of jet lag, but there are mixed
results regarding sleep-related health conditions such as insomnia.) Taking a typical dose (one to
three milligrams) of a melatonin supplement may elevate your blood melatonin levels one to twenty
times above normal.
     Recall that melatonin is a potent antioxidant, it modulates the immune system, and it regulates gut
peristalsis (see here and here). The results of studies evaluating melatonin supplementation in
autoimmune disease have been very mixed: melatonin has improved symptoms (in inflammatory
bowel diseases, fibromyalgia, and chronic fatigue syndrome), and it has also greatly exacerbated
them (also in inflammatory bowel diseases, as well as in celiac disease). A study evaluating
melatonin in rheumatoid arthritis showed no benefit (and even an increase in some markers of
inflammation, although it was not associated with a worsening of symptoms). Therefore, using
melatonin as a sleep aid should be carefully considered. If you choose to use it with the goal of using
it for only up to three months to help reset your circadian clock, a smaller dose (more like 0.25
milligrams) is believed to be much more effective. Also, avoid slow-release melatonin capsules, as
they don’t replicate the spike in melatonin that your body normally produces in the evening.
Supporting natural melatonin production to improve your sleep quality is the best place to start—
meaning that melatonin supplementation should be considered only after you’ve implemented changes
in diet and lifestyle, including spending time outside during the day, wearing amber-tinted glasses in
the evenings, sleeping in a dark room, and eating glycine- and tryptophan-rich foods.



      Making sleep a priority may take some time. People in our culture generally put their social life,
leisure activities, and job on the front burner and sleep on the back burner. If you have autoimmune
disease, neither work nor fun should come between you and slumber. As your body heals, you will
probably notice that the quality of your sleep will improve to the point that you might find that you
eventually need less sleep than you did initially (although you can pretty much count on needing seven
to nine hours a night for the rest of your life). And for most people, the more you sleep, the faster you
will heal.
Get Plenty of Low-Intensity Activity

We are used to thinking about exercise as a way of burning calories and building muscle so we can be
lean, muscular, and fit. But looking like an athlete or a supermodel is not the goal of exercising for
those with autoimmune disease. The goal is hormone management, most specifically regulating
hormones that are crucial for regulating inflammation and controlling the immune system. Where you
are starting from in terms of activity level, how fit you are, how mobile you are (for example, if your
autoimmune disease restricts your mobility or causes you pain), the types of activities you enjoy, and
how the rest of your life is structured will all affect how you fit physical activity into your life.
     It doesn’t have to be hard. Low-intensity activities include walking, swimming, yoga, tai chi,
gardening, and playing with your kids or dog—basically anything that doesn’t involve sitting or lying
down. If you are already fairly active, adding some more moderately intense exercise is probably
appropriate: hiking, jogging, dancing, bicycling, weight lifting, fitness classes, and various sports (all
of which can be taken to a strenuous or high-intensity level, so make sure you listen to your body and
don’t overdo it). And make sure to choose activities that you enjoy—if it’s not fun, it’s not worth it.
     If you’ve been very sedentary, you will need to build your stamina slowly. The best activity for
most people is walking. Going for several short walks throughout the day will keep the strain of
adding this new activity to your life low and help you build strength and endurance. Building up
endurance doesn’t have to mean that every time you walk, you walk a little bit longer or faster or
farther. It’s OK if you feel like a shorter walk than you walked the day before. It’s OK if you walk
very slowly. What’s important is to walk. If you are at risk of falling or being in so much pain that you
can’t make it back home, find a friend to walk with you or carry a cell phone. Or you can walk on a
treadmill. Or find another activity, like cycling on a stationary recumbent bicycle.
     If mobility is a challenge, maybe you can swim or go to water-exercise classes. You may be
able to find water-therapy classes (also known as aquatic therapy), which may be better tailored to
your individual needs. Chair exercises or chair aerobics might also be an option for you. If none of
these options are accessible, working with a physiotherapist to increase mobility will be very helpful
—just do the best you can within your limitations. As you heal, you may find that you can do more and
more and that activities that once seemed impossible no longer do.




                                           Illustration by Rob Foster
      If pain is preventing you from exercising, you have a few options. If your pain is so debilitating
that it severely restricts your mobility, working with a physiotherapist can be beneficial. Consider
doing simple stretching exercises that help to move your muscles and joints (your physiotherapist
should be able to train your caregiver to help you perform these exercises at home). Even simple
resistance exercises may work well for you (typically using resistance bands, but there are other
options). Many people find pain relief from alternative therapies, such as acupuncture, chiropractic
adjustments, or massage therapy, any of which could be worthwhile (see here). If your pain is the
more “minor” sort of aches and pains in your joints or muscles (typical of many autoimmune
diseases) that keeps you from taking part in your favorite sports but doesn’t seriously restrict your
movement, finding substitutes is a good solution. If this means giving up your favorite sport, think of it
as temporary. As your body heals, you might be able to gradually reintroduce your favorite activities
back into your life.
      If you are moderately active now, increasing your activity might just be a question of decreasing
the amount of time you spend sitting each day. For example, if going for an evening walk is already
part of your normal routine, maybe you can find a way to take a second walk in the middle of your day
to break up your sitting-at-your-desk time. Other than using a treadmill desk, there are other options
for combining exercise equipment with work, like a recumbent or semirecumbent bike desk. These
alternatives are not meant to provide a workout while you crunch numbers or design new software,
but rather to get you out of a static position. So you might walk at one mile an hour at a treadmill desk
or even slower. It still adds up over the course of a workday. If you do decide to take advantage of
one of these desk options, it’s important to acclimate slowly. It can be quite a shock to your system to
go from sitting eight hours a day to walking for eight hours straight all of a sudden. Also, make sure
you don’t hop on the treadmill immediately after meals. Give yourself a good thirty minutes to an hour
to digest, during which time you can work at a sitting desk.
      There are also many sneaky, small ways to increase your activity throughout the day. Make it a
rule to park a little farther away from the grocery store entrance (and everywhere else you park your
car). Remember those three-minute dance parties I mentioned on see here? Those aren’t just great for
stress relief. Don’t like dancing? Maybe you just hit the floor for a set or two of push-ups or sit-ups
periodically. Maybe you simply do something while standing that you would normally do sitting (like
reading a magazine or solving a crossword puzzle). Many hobbies can both relieve stress and get you
moving, like gardening, bird-watching (which typically involves walking), woodworking, throwing
pottery, sculpting, playing a musical instrument, bowling, curling, or even yo-yoing.
      If you are not used to being active, investing in good-quality natural-movement footwear (like a
barefoot-style running shoe or minimalist footwear) can be well worth it, as these kinds of shoes will
support the best alignment for your body. Even if you are very active, natural-movement footwear is a
good choice. Going barefoot as much as possible is even better, for everyone. If you are used to
wearing heels, orthotics, or very restrictive footwear, you will want to ease into being barefoot
gradually.
      If you are super active and are trying to cut back on the intensity and duration of your workouts
while increasing the rest time in between because vigorous exercise may be exacerbating your
disease (see here), replacing it with gentle exercise like walking or yoga will be very beneficial.
      No matter where you are on the activity spectrum, slowly building up strength, endurance,
agility, flexibility, and skill are your goals. If you overdo it (sometimes you just don’t know until
afterward that a workout was too much), make sure to give your body plenty of rest (twenty-four to
forty-eight hours) before the next exercise period. During this rest time, you can still do low-intensity
activity (basically anything that requires less exertion than whatever you were doing when you
overdid it). Getting extra sleep will also aid your recovery.
      You are far more likely to make time for something that you love and that makes you feel great
than for something that’s boring and that you’re doing just “because it’s good for me.” Make sure that
the space where you do your exercise makes you feel comfortable, too. Even if you like what you’re
doing, if you feel intimidated or creeped out by the environment, it won’t be sustainable.
Improving Your Environment

What I’ve been talking about is making whatever changes you can to your environment and to your
daily routine to help you manage stress, protect your circadian rhythms, get adequate sleep, and move
a little. Whatever you can do is worthwhile; every little bit helps. And it’s OK if it feels like a
constant work in progress—that’s what life is. It is important that whatever changes you make stick,
and this often means taking things one step at a time rather than making drastic changes in one fell
swoop.
      In many ways, this is all about balance. You may not have realized that your life was out of
balance in any way, but your autoimmune disease is a big red flag that it is. Finding balance means
creating harmony between life responsibilities and your responsibility to get yourself well. You may
not be able to change everything you’d like to—at least not initially—so figure out what will make the
biggest difference and start tinkering to effect that change, whether it’s getting more sleep, getting
more UV rays, eating more organ meat, or practicing meditation. The way you implement the
recommendations in The Paleo Approach will reflect your unique needs and desires.
      As you progress in your journey toward better health, what doesn’t seem possible now may
seem totally doable later. And nothing has to be forever: if something doesn’t work, it’s OK to revert
to your old way or try something new. You have to constantly reevaluate the impact your lifestyle and
environment have on your health and make adjustments along the way.
      Recall that a variety of environmental toxins may be key triggers for your autoimmune disease
(see here). Improving your environment also means evaluating whether there are any environmental
triggers around you that need to be addressed.
      Again, all you can do is your best. And again, it’s important not to use “I am doing my best” as
an excuse not to make changes that you really are able to make.
Chapter 6 Review



   Managing Meals


       Prioritize family meals.
       Make cooking fun, social, and relaxing.
       Practice good meal hygiene.

       Sit down to eat and focus on your food.
       Don’t rush; be sure to chew thoroughly.
       Don’t rush digestion or eat when under duress.


       Eat 2 to 3 large meals per day.



   Managing Stress


       Say no.
       Ask for help.
       Address job stressors.

       Take time-outs to do deep breathing or stretch your body at work.
       Good posture while working is important.
       Find excuses to get up and move.
       Leave your work at work.
       Focus on stress-relieving activities before and after work.


       Have fun.

       Make time for a hobby.
       Get your silly on.
       Smile and laugh.


       Enjoy and connect with nature.

       Play in the dirt.
    Use your brain.
    Turn your brain off.

    Practice active meditation, such as yoga, tai chi, or martial arts.
    Practice mindful meditation.


    Focus on small changes that make you feel

    Listen to music.
    Light a candle or make a fire.
    Use aromatherapy.
    Switch up your commute to work.
    Use a light alarm.
    Get a massage.
    Take a mineral-salts bath.
    Keep a gratitude journal.




Protecting Circadian Rhythms


    Get sun exposure during the day.

    Consider using a light-therapy box.


    Keep lights dim in the evening.

    Try wearing amber-tinted glasses.


    Practice good sleep hygiene.

    Keep the bedroom cool, quiet, and completely dark.


    Do moderately intense physical activity.
    Keep mealtimes “on schedule.”
    Get enough good sleep.

    Figure out your ideal bedtime for getting enough sleep.
Activity


    Add low-intensity activities to your life.

    Anything besides sitting or lying down constitutes activity.
    Low-intensity activities include walking, yoga, tai chi, gardening, and playing with your
    kids or your dog.
    Moderate-intensity activities include hiking, jogging, dancing, bicycling, weight lifting,
    fitness classes, and various sports.
    Activities for those with limited mobility include swimming, water-exercise classes,
    water-therapy classes, chair exercises, and chair aerobics.


    Investigate the option of an active desk at work.
    Take up a hobby that isn’t sedentary.
    Take every opportunity to add movement to your day.
    Avoid strenuous activity.



Improving Your Environment


    Small changes can add up to make a big difference.
Chapter 7
Implementing the Paleo Approach
          “ The doctor of the future will no longer treat the human frame with drugs, but rather
          will cure and prevent disease with nutrition.”
          —THOMAS EDISON


You now have a very good idea of what to eat and how to alter your lifestyle to promote healing.
Maybe you’ve already ordered your amber-tinted glasses and found your local farmers’ market. But
you probably still have a few lingering questions.

Knowing what you have to do and actually doing it are definitely two different things. This chapter
deals with some of the practical and emotional aspects of doing a lifestyle makeover. In this chapter
I’ll also give you a heads-up about what to expect as you go Paleo Approach, how long it might take
for you to see results, and whether or not you will have to follow such a restricted protocol for the
rest of your life. This chapter can probably be thought of as FAQ headquarters, the most important
question being the first one: Is this really a cure?
“Is This Really a Cure?”
Let me be clear: there is no cure for autoimmune disease. Once your body has developed the ability to
attack itself, it will never forget how to do so. You can still heal damaged tissue, and you can still
rein in the immune system, but once you’ve got an autoimmune disease, it’s there for good—it can
flare again at any time.
      Even though there is no cure for autoimmune disease, following the Paleo Approach is the next
best thing because it can put your autoimmune disease into remission. The technical definition of
remission is “a diminution of the seriousness or intensity of disease or pain; a temporary recovery.”
Being in remission will make you feel as if your disease has been cured, since you will experience no
symptoms (or at least significantly reduced ones). And while the word temporary is included right in
the definition of remission, with careful diet and lifestyle choices many of you will actually be able to
keep your autoimmune disease in remission for the rest of your life!
      As you tackle the recommendations in this book, skepticism will be a natural reaction. Even
though you’ve read through all the science, you still may have doubts about whether this approach can
work for you. If you are very ill, especially if you have gotten very little relief from pharmaceutical
approaches to disease management, you may feel defeated, as if nothing will ever make a difference.
You might feel that it’s too late for you or that food is the only pleasure you have left. My best and
only response is that you won’t know until you try. And give the Paleo Approach a good, all-in, the-
whole-kit-and-caboodle, try. Isn’t doing without some of your favorite foods worth it if you can feel
100 percent again?

          “ The beginning is the most important part of the work.”
     —PLATO
Transition
There are two methods for making sweeping changes to your diet and lifestyle. The first is to decide
what you are going to do, spend an appropriate amount of time preparing, and then pick a day to start
doing it. You might call this “jumping in with both feet” or “going cold turkey.” Depending on what
you are eating and how you are living now, as well as how sick you are and how desperate you are to
get well, this may be the best choice for you. The second option is to decide which steps are
manageable and to take them one at a time. This is a slower process, but is more doable and
sustainable for many.
      The method of transition is totally your choice. This is your journey to health, and you get to
choose the route. So think about what you know about yourself: Is it better for you to make gradual
changes, or will drawing out the process make you feel frustrated and likely to give up before you
reach your goal? Are you a jump-in-with-both-feet kind of person, or will the initial rough couple of
weeks be more than you can handle? Do you do well with a strict set of rules, or will that make you
want to rebel? If you aren’t sure, there are a few more aspects of transition to consider to help you
reach a decision.
      Choosing a transition method is a matter of balancing compliance and sustainability.
      Compliance is a term used in the medical community and the pharmaceutical industry that refers
to how well you stick to a particular protocol (or in the case of medications, how well you take the
medication as directed). Pharmaceutical companies use compliance as a means of quantifying how
effective their medication is. Compliance is seen as an indicator both of how well the drug works and
how severe the side effects are. If the side effects are severe and the drug doesn’t work all that well,
fewer people end up taking the medication as directed—that is, compliance is low. If the medication
works marvelously and there are very few side effects, more people take that medication on schedule
—that is, compliance is high.
      When it comes to the Paleo Approach, compliance means how closely the way you eat follows
the protocol. Certainly, there is some wiggle room (for example, whether or not you eat high-
FODMAP foods or egg yolks or how often you eat fish or liver). And you may know that certain
foods that I nix work really well for you. (Which foods might be reintroduced is discussed in detail in
chapter 9.) For example, maybe you know that you do really well with fermented, raw, grass-fed
dairy, so you will decide to keep that in your diet even from the beginning. These choices don’t fall
under the banner of compliance. Compliance in this instance means how often you eat something that
you know is not good for you, that you know will cause a reaction or a worsening of symptoms, or
that you know will slow the healing of your gut and the rest of your body.
      Sustainability is the ability for something to be maintained at a certain rate or level. This can
mean many things, depending on which aspect of the Paleo Approach we are talking about
(environmental sustainability, economic sustainability, etc.). In the context of implementing the
dietary and lifestyle changes recommended in this book, the discussion of sustainability means
individual sustainability or, rather, your ability to stick with these changes for the long haul. Are you
more likely to stick with something if you approach it the same way you would breaking a bad habit
—investing effort to make a change until a habit is formed and the change feels effortless? Are you
more likely to stick with something if you ease into it and make one manageable change at a time? Are
you more likely to stick with the Paleo Approach if you see quick results? Can you be patient and
remain optimistic if you don’t see immediate results?
      How you transition to the Paleo Approach has an impact on both compliance and sustainability,
but what that impact is will vary from person to person. Perhaps I should emphasize that many people
will not see improvements until they remove all problem foods from their diets. So if you decide to
transition one step at a time, you can’t expect to see substantial results until you’ve taken all the steps
(although some people will see incremental improvements with each step). If drawing out the
transition process and potentially not seeing benefits with each step may discourage you and make
you lose your motivation to continue, then jumping in with both feet would be a better strategy for
you. And you can surely start the transition by going step by step and then jump in with both feet if or
when it feels right.
      Jumping into the Paleo Approach with both feet can be a little jarring, but there’s the advantage
of having to force yourself to adjust quickly and typically seeing dramatic improvements sooner. Be
warned, though, that even when you “get the transition over with” this way, some people experience
some lag time while their bodies adjust to new macronutrient ratios and new foods before they start to
see improvements. But many others report phenomenal improvements in their symptoms within the
first few days of transitioning. At the other end of the spectrum, rapid transitions can also cause
symptoms that resemble Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions (see here) for a small number of people.
      As a general rule, increasing sleep and managing stress will make the dietary changes easier to
manage. Of course, if you start carving out extra time for cooking, it might be hard to also carve out
extra time for physical activity, mindful meditation, and going to bed earlier. Or maybe you think that
getting more sleep is a higher priority for you than all the dietary changes, so you focus on sleep
before you focus on food prep. For many people, it is easiest to address diet first and then lifestyle.
Just remember that lifestyle factors are important, too.
      How you transition is up to you. How you approach changing your diet and lifestyle will depend
on how you are eating now, what your personality is like, how sick you are, how comfortable you are
in the kitchen, how strong your support network is, and how accessible these changes are for you.
There is no wrong way to transition as long as you reach your goal in the end.




Suggested Priorities for Incremental Implementation
While I believe that just diving in is the most expedient way to get results, I realize that it isn’t
appropriate for everyone. If you are going to transition one step at a time, the following are
suggestions for priorities:
     Eliminate gut-irritating foods from your diet. This can be done as a multistep process while
you work on the other steps. Focus on gluten first. This means cutting out all foods that contain wheat,
rye, and barley (as well as hidden gluten ingredients like malt; see here). But don’t replace them with
gluten-free alternatives: no rice-, potato-, or sorghum-based gluten-free bread. Instead, try to get used
to not eating bread. Next, focus on other grains (like rice) and pseudo-grains (like quinoa). Next, cut
out legumes, getting rid of soy and peanuts first. Next, cut out nightshades. Because of the
pervasiveness of nightshades in spices (if an ingredients label lists “spices,” chances are good that
the food contains paprika), this step typically puts the kibosh on eating prepackaged foods. Next, cut
out dairy products. Next, eggs (maybe egg whites first and then whole eggs). Cut out any foods that
contain added sugars (like soda), especially refined sugars and high-fructose-content sugars. Cut out
nuts and seeds, and finally cut out seed-based spices. If there are any processed or manufactured
foods left in your diet that do not meet the criteria of the Paleo Approach (for example, if you are still
buying canned coconut milk that contains guar gum or still chewing gum sweetened with xylitol), cut
those out.
     Start cooking all your food. Unfortunately, it’s very difficult to get meals that meet Paleo
Approach standards from restaurants or prepackaged. This can be one of the biggest challenges in
following a restricted diet because we are so used to convenience. Start collecting recipes for quick
meals that can be prepared midweek. Cook big so you have enough for a few days’ worth of
leftovers. And double or triple recipes so you can fill your freezer with meals that can be thawed and
reheated when you’re too busy or too tired to cook.
    Get used to your meals consisting of some kind of protein (meat, poultry, fish, or shellfish),
some vegetables (maybe a few different colors, including at least one that is green), and maybe
some fruit. Every meal should look like this, even breakfast. It can seem a little strange at first to eat
a pork chop and roasted vegetables for breakfast, but it doesn’t take long before it becomes your new
normal. This would be a good time to try some new vegetables or types of meat and fish and
experiment with new ways to cook them.
      Start thinking about fats. Switch to high-quality fats—such as tallow, lard, bacon fat, and
coconut oil—as your main cooking fats. Use olive oil and avocado oil as your raw fats (as in salad
dressings). Also start thinking about your omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid intake ratio. This means both
sourcing quality meats as often as possible and incorporating fish and shellfish into your diet as often
as possible. This step also overlaps with the next step.
      Address food quality. Start eating grass-fed and pasture-raised meat, wild-caught fish, and
organic, locally grown, in-season fruits and vegetables (budget and access permitting).
     Work on eating variety and maybe adding some new foods. If you find that you are eating the
same foods day in and day out, it’s time to broaden your horizons. Start trying new foods and
increasing the variety in your diet. The more different foods you incorporate into your diet, the higher
the likelihood of providing your body with all the nutrients it needs to heal.
      Purge your pantry. As you go through each step, throw out what you don’t eat anymore (or
compost, or feed to some ducks, or give to a food bank or to a non-Paleo friend).
      Find support. One of the toughest things about adopting the Paleo Approach (or even the
standard Paleo diet) can be the lack of understanding from friends and family. I suggest finding some
blogs or podcasts, or some forums where you can post questions, and cozying up to friends or
acquaintances who have limited diets (whether they’re gluten-free or have food allergies), because
they will be fairly sympathetic about your need to eat off the grid. Having a sense of common cause
will give you the strength to cope with questions and judgments from the uninformed people around
you.
      Address other lifestyle factors. Don’t forget to address the lifestyle aspects of the Paleo
Approach. You can work on increasing sleep, managing stress, protecting your circadian rhythms, and
getting more mild- to moderate-intensity exercise while you improve your diet.
     Celebrate! When you reach your goal of transitioning to the Paleo Approach, make sure that you
appreciate how far you’ve come, the effort you’ve put in, and the healing you are enjoying as a result.
Maybe this would be a good excuse to buy that lobster and grass-fed steak you’ve been eyeing, or
treat yourself to some time at the spa or to a nice long soak in a mineral-salts bath.
“Do I Have to Go All In?”
A fairly common question when faced with a restrictive diet is this: “Do I have to do all of this?”
Followed by: “What if I just try removing X and Y first and see if that helps?” I would like to be able
to say that everyone with autoimmune disease must follow the recommendations in this book to the
letter. However, the biggest contributors to autoimmune disease vary from individual to individual,
which is why some people get enormous results simply by going gluten-free or adopting a standard
Paleo diet. Yes, you might see some (or even dramatic) improvement with fewer food restrictions
than I present. If you want to go that route, be my guest. Chapter 4 lists a variety of approaches that
sometimes work for people with autoimmune disease, and any one of them could be a starting place
for you if going “all in” is just too much. However, chances are that you’ve already been there, done
that, and that’s why you are reading this book.
      Also, I must once again emphasize that every single recommendation in this book is supported by
scientific studies. By addressing all the likely food and lifestyle culprits en masse, the Paleo
Approach becomes a very powerful means of managing autoimmune disease. It is the most expedient
way to remove all the controllable triggers of your autoimmune disease and heal your body. And
while jumping in with both feet may seem intimidating, it’s also the fastest way to feel better.
Preparing for the Paleo Approach
No matter how you transition, taking a little time to prepare can be very helpful (which is especially
true if you are jumping in with both feet). This will probably entail shopping, cooking some food to
put in the freezer, and organizing your support network.
      If you are jumping in with both feet, cleaning out your pantry of foods you know you won’t be
eating anymore is a great place to start. Doing so also helps you get a handle on your food inventory.
For example, you probably already have olive oil, some vinegars, and some spices. If you currently
follow a Paleo diet, maybe you already have some grass-fed beef in your freezer and some lard from
pasture-raised pigs. You can use the food lists in chapter 5 to guide your shopping. As you
contemplate your new Paleo Approach–friendly pantry, don’t worry about buying everything at once.
A good place to start is to figure out what meals you plan to cook over the next week or so and make
a list of all the ingredients in them that you don’t have. This way, you can stock your pantry slowly
over a few months.
      Figuring out where to buy some of the specialty food items in this book can be a little
challenging. As a general rule, most can be found in health food stores and specialty or ethnic
markets. You can try the organic food, gluten-free food, or vegan food sections in local grocery stores
(which are often found together). You might also be able to source some of these items from co-ops
or buyers’ clubs. Many specialty-food items can be bought cheaper online, and, depending on where
you live, online shopping may be your only option for some ingredients.
      Stocking up on canned fish, frozen cooked shrimp, frozen vegetables, frozen fish fillets, and
ground meat will enable you to pull a meal together in less time than it takes to say “pull a meal
together.”
      Getting a jump-start on cooking can be very helpful, especially if you won’t have much kitchen
time during the week. Cooking a few meals for your freezer (soups and stews obviously freeze well,
but so do roasted meats, homemade sausage, broths, and even some veggie dishes). I recommend
having some easy protein sources on hand for quick breakfasts and lunches during the week (maybe
some roasted and sliced chicken or beef and some homemade sausage). I also suggest making a big
batch of broth, which can be frozen in individual servings or in ice cube trays or made into soup,
which itself can be frozen. So many recipes call for only half or one cup of broth that having small
portions ready to go can be a real time-saver. And because it’s so easy to thaw and reheat a single
serving, it’s a cinch to get some broth into your diet.
      One of the biggest hurdles for many is figuring out how to spend more quality time in the kitchen;
that is, how to create space in your day to feed yourself well. This might mean dedicating one
afternoon a week to batch cooking or developing a repertoire of meals that you can whip up in a flash
or that provide ample leftovers. It might mean adjusting your schedule so that you can start preparing
dinner a little earlier, or becoming better acquainted with a slow cooker, pressure cooker, or sous-
vide water oven. Another great strategy is to get your family in on the kitchen action. If you’re not
used to cooking, it’s important to think about how you are going to make time for it before you go full-
on Paleo Approach: it’s much harder to make good food choices when you’re hungry, it’s 6 p.m., and
you have kids whining for mac and cheese.
      Just as with cooking, it’s a good idea to start strategizing how to make time for physical activity,
meditation, and relaxation and what your bedtime goal should be beforehand. Rejiggering your life to
make time for these things also means shoring up your support network. Think about who can help you
with particular tasks. Talk to your spouse, your parents, your kids, your siblings, your neighbors, your
friends, parents of kids in your child’s class, members of your church or clubs you belong to, support
groups, community centers, online communities. Maybe all you need is someone to answer questions
or to commiserate with or to help you problem-solve as you implement an aspect of the Paleo
Approach. Maybe you just need a cheerleader to say, “Good job!” Your support network will almost
certainly evolve over time, but figuring out whom you can count on for whatever you may need before
you begin can make the transition feel less overwhelming.
Getting Through the First Month




This mostly applies to those of you who decide to dive right in, but some of you who opt for the step-
by-step approach will have some of the same experiences.
      Some people feel better within days of being on the Paleo Approach. The immediate results
inspire them toward further improvements. Their optimism and excitement become contagious. Soon,
everyone they know is making healthy life changes, too. But this isn’t true for everyone. For some
people, the initial transition can be rough. Those first few weeks might be wrought with even more
fatigue, headaches, and even new symptoms, like rashes or diarrhea or constipation.
      It is nearly impossible to predict who will have an easy transition and who will have a difficult
one. But understanding the factors that might make the transition difficult is important. Knowing what
is probably going on in your body (and how long it typically lasts) will help you stick to your plan as
you transition or help you figure out if you need to seek professional medical advice.
      If you are used to eating a lot of carbohydrates, especially sugars, it will probably take you two
to four weeks to adjust to the lower carbohydrate and sugar content of the Paleo Approach. Your
metabolism will have to adapt from running predominantly on sugars to using fat for fuel. (In a healthy
person, the body runs well on both sugar and fats and easily uses whichever fuel is available at the
moment.) As your metabolism shifts, you might experience symptoms, colloquially referred to as
“carb flu,” like fatigue, lethargy, headaches, intense food cravings (usually for sugars, but sometimes
for fats), mood swings, depression, anxiety, malaise, and even stomach and digestive upset. During
this adjustment period, making sure that you are eating quality fats, staying well hydrated, being
physically active, managing stress, and getting as much sleep as possible will help tremendously. You
may find that a spoonful of coconut oil or MCT oil taken with or between meals relieves many
symptoms (because it is such an easy energy source for the body; see here). Other people find relief
from collagen or L-glutamine supplements between meals.
      There may also be a substantial shift in hormone expression. Insulin, leptin, ghrelin, cortisol, and
melatonin are all likely to change in levels, sensitivity, and rhythmicity throughout the day. There may
also be an effect on sex hormones (see here) because of the interplay between sex hormones and both
hunger hormones and the HPA axis. This may cause acne, changes in libido, and, for women, changes
(typically improvements, but not always) in menstrual cycle (heaviness of flow, duration of menses,
time between menses, severity of cramps, severity of PMS). Thyroid hormones are also apt to shift
because of the strong connection between thyroid function and insulin, cortisol, and sex hormones.
      You can also expect some symptoms relating to the adjustment of your gut microbiota and to
changes that might be taking place in your digestive tract (such as in the thickness of the mucus layer
and in peristalsis, which affects transit time). When the food you feed your gut microbiota changes
radically, so do the numbers, types, and locations of your gut microorganisms. This is a good thing,
but it can cause increased or decreased frequency of bowel movements, constipation, diarrhea,
nausea, abdominal pain, gas, and bloating. These gastrointestinal symptoms can be minimized by
using digestive-support supplements (see here), increasing omega-3 intake, decreasing fructose
intake, decreasing intake of FODMAP-containing foods, and limiting yourself to eating cooked fruits
and vegetables (at least for the moment). These symptoms shouldn’t last more than two to four weeks,
but if they persist or are severe, talk to a medical professional.
      The symptoms associated with transition are often called Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions,
Herxheimer reactions, or more colloquially “die-off” or “Herxing.” Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions
refer to a flood of bacterial toxins and proinflammatory cytokines that may arise when a large number
of pathogenic organisms die rapidly in the body. Initially used to describe the symptoms of syphilis
patients treated with mercury (as an antibacterial) at the turn of the twentieth century, the term now
refers to symptoms experienced as a result of any antibacterial treatment (like antibiotics) and is most
often associated with the rapid die-off of spirochete-type bacteria. Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions in
the context of antibacterial treatments generally occur fairly rapidly after the first dose. Symptoms
may include fever, chills, rigor (rigidity of parts of the body), hypotension, headache, rapid heart rate,
hyperventilation, flushing, muscle pain, exacerbation of skin lesions, and anxiety. These reactions
usually abate by themselves and do not require treatment.
      Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions have been observed in patients with sarcoidosis undergoing
tetracycline therapy to eradicate persistent infections of a type of antibiotic-resistant bacteria
(suspected of, if not a direct cause of, sarcoidosis). They have also been observed in patients treated
for chronic Lyme disease to eradicate infections of the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, which has
also been linked to multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis (see here). However, there have been
no medical studies to identify whether Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions can occur as a result of rapid
die-off of bacterial or yeast overgrowth in the gut (whether caused by antibiotics or by a drastic
change in diet).
      When patients are treated for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) with strong,
nonabsorbable antibiotics (see here), side effects generally include weakness, headache, dizziness,
insomnia, constipation, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, abdominal pain, taste disturbance, loss of
appetite, and skin rash. Depending on the drug used, these symptoms are typically minor. Frequency
of occurrence varies by drug and study design. Some studies report side effects occurring with
frequency similar to that in placebo groups (meaning that these are all symptoms that can go along
with SIBO and are not necessarily related to treatment), typically in 2 to 5 percent of subjects. With
some drugs, adverse reactions (most commonly diarrhea) have frequency rates upward of 50 percent.
However, these side effects are not classified as Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions.




What If You Have Constipation or Diarrhea on the Paleo
Approach?
If you experience constipation or diarrhea during your transition to the Paleo Approach, it should
resolve within two to four weeks. During that time, refer to here for treatment options and to here and
here for strategies to improve digestion. If it persists beyond four weeks or is severe, please consult
with a medical professional.



      Anecdotally, many alternative health care professionals report transient gastrointestinal
symptoms and even transient skin symptoms (like acne and rashes) after patients adopt diets similar to
the Paleo Approach (most commonly the GAPS diet or SCD;see here). These symptoms are typically
attributed to the toxic load that the rapidly changing gut microflora can create (assuming that bacteria
in your digestive tract are dying off in great numbers and then various toxins are entering the body
through a leaky gut). However, whether these symptoms can truly be attributed to Jarisch-Herxheimer
reactions remains unknown. What is known is that focusing both on supporting healthy digestion and
on nutrient density, especially on nutrients that support liver function (see here), can be helpful in
resolving these symptoms faster. Of course, doing so is already built into the Paleo Approach.
      What does this mean when people with autoimmune disease (who probably have gut dysbiosis,
including the high likelihood of bacterial overgrowth) dramatically change their diets? Beyond the
metabolic adjustment to reduced carbohydrate and sugar intake and hormone adjustments, they can
expect to experience gastrointestinal discomfort. However, whether these symptoms can be attributed
to Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions is conjecture.
How Long Will It Take to Heal?




          “ Sickness comes on horseback but departs on foot.”
          —DUTCH PROVERB

If making such sweeping changes to your lifestyle seems daunting, you may want to have some idea of
how long it’s going to take before you see the results. This is a very reasonable expectation, but
unfortunately how long it will take your body to heal enough for you to notice an improvement in the
symptoms of your disease depends on a wide variety of factors: how leaky your gut is, how inflamed
your body is, exactly what types of antibodies your body is producing, and which cells in your body
they are attacking. It depends on how much damage has been done to which tissues and which
hormones are dysregulated and to what degree. Just as your genes will predispose you to developing
autoimmunity, they also dictate how easy it is for your body to stop producing those antibodies and
for your body to heal. How long you have had your disease and how well you implement all the
recommendations in this book are also factors. Interestingly, this doesn’t necessarily mean that people
who have more severe autoimmune diseases will take longer to see improvement. It’s quite hard to
predict who will experience earth-shatteringly rapid improvement and who will have a long, drawn-
out recovery.
     There are anecdotal reports of people experiencing enormous shifts within a single day of
adopting the Paleo Approach. Then there are people who see no changes initially and start to
experience improvements only after two to four months (which is what happened to me, although it
took me a few months to go all in). If you have been meticulously following the Paleo Approach for
three to four months without any results, it may be helpful to read through chapter 8 and to work with
a functional-medicine specialist to address specific challenges you may have (see here).
     How long it will take to experience full remission also varies. While some people heal rapidly
and experience full resolution of their symptoms within a month, others have a long road to travel
(typically with slow but gradual improvement and with the necessity for strict compliance to the
Paleo Approach for an extended period). Also, some people will have irreparable tissue damage,
meaning that while vast improvement is still possible, complete remission might not be. Individual
results will vary.
      Seeing improvement in your symptoms requires making progress toward resolving gut dysbiosis,
restoring the integrity of your gut barrier, regulating the innate and adaptive immune systems, and
healing damaged tissues.
      Your gut needs to heal, and this takes time. If you are lucky enough not to have severe gut
dysbiosis or damage to your gut barrier, it may take as little as two to four weeks and up to about six
months. Severe gut dysbiosis, especially in conjunction with autoimmune diseases that attack the
tissues of the digestive system (as in the case of celiac disease), can take anywhere from six months
to five years. This doesn’t mean that it will take that long to see improvement, just that improvement
will be gradual over that period.
      Your body also needs to stop producing autoantibodies and attacking itself. How long this takes
is closely linked to addressing micronutrient deficiencies, dealing with hormone imbalances,
increasing sleep quantity and quality, and managing stress, as well as removing dietary triggers and
repairing the gut. It typically takes three to six months to measure reductions in autoantibody
formation, although if your gut is healing slowly, it may take substantially longer.
      Damaged tissues need to heal. Depending on which tissues or organs were the target of your
disease and how badly damaged they were (which is related to how long you have had your
autoimmune disease but also how aggressive it is), it can take a substantial amount of time for these
tissues to heal. Think of a bad cut that needs stitches. You might have the stitches removed after two
weeks, but that doesn’t mean your wound is completely healed. You may still keep it bandaged and
apply ointments to promote healing. It will probably have a scab. When the scab falls off, you may
have a very pink and bumpy scar. Over six months to two years, the scar will fade and become
smoother. This is the same healing process that is going on internally (minus the stitches). For many
autoimmune diseases, it is impossible to assess the actual damage to tissues (except maybe to go by
hormone levels, blood markers of organ damage, or symptoms—but these aren’t direct measures in
most cases). And how efficient healing is will depend on a great many other factors, like
micronutrient status, how much sleep you are getting, how well you are managing stress, and your
genes.
      As pessimistic as this might sound, remember that this is how long it may take to heal
completely. Healing is a process, and the vast majority of people will notice improvement in their
symptoms long, long, long before the process is complete.
      Is there anything you can do to speed up the healing process? The more strictly you adhere to the
Paleo Approach, the more conducive an environment to healing you will create within your body.
Many people find that alternative therapies can be beneficial adjuncts to their other efforts (see here).
Most of all, be patient. Don’t resent the person who heals quickly. Appreciate the changes you are
seeing. Don’t give up. Keep working to source better-quality foods, increase nutrient density, and
optimize your lifestyle. Seek professional help if you need it. These are multifaceted diseases, and
sometimes you have to get every piece of the puzzle in place to see results.
How Strict Do You Have to Be?


I know from experience that this is a very difficult diet to commit to. I also know from experience that
100 percent commitment is typically required, at least in the beginning. Unlike the standard Paleo
diet, there is no 80/20 rule when it comes to the Paleo Approach. There are some gray areas and
some borderline foods that you are welcome to experiment with, but most people with autoimmune
disease do not tolerate “cheats,” even if the usual “just keep it gluten-free and not too often” Paleo-
diet rules are followed. In fact, some foods that many other people can consume on a regular basis
can cause serious flares, even if you have just a taste. And there are few things more frustrating than
weeks or months of an autoimmune disease flare because you ate tomatoes in your salad at a dinner
out that one time.
      This isn’t to say that everyone who has an autoimmune disease can’t eat the occasional handful
of nuts or an omelet without dire consequences. In fact, many can, especially after following the Paleo
Approach strictly for a while—meaning that after your body has healed substantially, your tolerance
for many foods is likely to increase. Food reintroductions are discussed in detail in chapter 9.
      Whether you jump in with both feet or transition incrementally, once you arrive at 100 percent
compliance with the Paleo Approach, I recommend committing for at least one month (and three or
four would be much better—and better yet, until your disease is in full remission) before you start
experimenting with foods to determine your individual tolerance for and sensitivity to them. Also,
understand that your tolerance for potentially irritating foods (like eggs or nuts) may vary depending
on how much sleep you’re getting, how well managed your stress is, and so on. It can be tricky to find
the line that can’t be crossed, but it is much easier to find it after you have experienced substantial
healing.




When Will the Paleo Approach Start to Feel Natural?




Alas, it’s a myth that it takes 21 days to make or break a habit. Habit formation is very complicated,
and there is a huge variability in how long people have to repetitively perform a task before that task
becomes automatic. A recent study showed that the average length of time it takes to form a new habit
is more like 66 days—but it varies from 18 to 254 days. This doesn’t mean that it will take you two
(or even eight) months before the Paleo Approach feels like second nature. Chances are, as soon as
you start to see improvement in your symptoms, finding the motivation to keep going will be easy,
even if the diet and lifestyle changes still feel like effort.




Will Just a Little Bit Hurt Me?




This is one of those slippery-slope questions. What if I take just one bite? What if I eat it only on my
birthday? Depending on what you’re talking about, eating even a little bit could completely undermine
your efforts to recover from your autoimmune disease. The easiest way to emphasize what a little bit
of a food can do is to think of peanut allergies and how someone who is allergic to peanuts can go
into full-blown anaphylactic shock from a food that touched something that touched a peanut. Yes, a
little can hurt.
       This doesn’t mean that every food excluded from the Paleo Approach will cause a catastrophic
reaction, but while you are in the process of healing, testing your tolerance for specific foods is not in
your best interest.
Testimonial by Alison Golden
“ I seem to have spent much of my life sick with various illnesses—typical childhood illnesses,
which I got far more often and far more severely than other kids my age. Viruses and bacterial
infections were the norm, hospitalizations, frequent doses of antibiotics. But it was endometriosis,
diagnosed when I was twenty-five, that, two decades, five operations, and several rounds of in
vitro fertilization later, dominated my medical history. Following a basic Paleo template improved
my pain and boosted my energy but did not address those issues sufficiently. So I decided to go to
the next level and adopt the Paleo Approach. It seemed like the sensible thing to do.
     Professionally, I have achieved far more since undertaking the Paleo Approach. I have less
pain and more energy, I can respond to intense demands as needed, and I am simply able to enjoy
my life more. I’ve found following the Paleo Approach to be enormously empowering in terms of
identifying problem foods and reducing my symptoms. It has been far more effective than any
conventional and invasive medical treatments offered in the past.
     Without the Paleo Approach, I would have been counting the days to menopause, and even
then with just a slight hope of relief. Sometimes there is grief about having to eliminate so many
food items, but after a while, and with practice, as with all losses, I’ve found that we make
progress and come to resolution. And if we are lucky, we can heal to the point of reintroducing
those foods without penalty.
     The Paleo Approach is pretty darn powerful. ”
     Alison Golden is author of The Modern No-Nonsense Guide to Paleo and blogs at
PaleoNonPaleo (paleononpaleo.com).
Getting to a Healthy Weight




      The body mass index, while useful as a general guide, is an oversimplified formula that cannot accurately determine your optimal
weight. Instead, judge whether or not you are at a healthy weight by how you feel.



Whether you are overweight or underweight, arriving at a healthy weight will probably be fairly easy
on the Paleo Approach, as your gut heals and your digestion improves, as inflammation subsides, and
as hormones become better regulated. In fact, your body’s ability to maintain a healthy weight can
even be used as a metric of successfully managing your autoimmune disease. The converse is also
true—getting to a healthy weight will actually help your body heal and resolve inflammation.
     Your weight is determined by a complex set of variables—it is not just an equation involving
calories in and calories out. While your energy intake and energy expenditure are certainly two of the
variables, there are many others, including the levels, sensitivity, and rhythmicity of dozens of
hormones (like insulin, leptin, ghrelin, and cortisol) and neurotransmitters (like dopamine and
serotonin); the presence of inflammation; and your nutrient status (which, of course, circles back to
hormones and neurotransmitters). Many experts in nutrition and weight loss believe that these other
factors are way more important than calories consumed and hours at the gym. And these other factors
influence your caloric intake by providing the senses of hunger, satiety, craving, and satisfaction.
They also influence your degree of activity by regulating energy, fatigue, and motivation. The
hormonal and chemical environment in your body determines the weight your body wants to be.
     If you are considerably overweight, losing weight will contribute to the successful management
of your disease because the cells of adipose tissue (predominantly adipocytes, or fat cells, but also
the macrophages and dendritic cells that reside in these tissues) are extremely sensitive to
proinflammatory signals (such as cytokines, infectious agents, and endotoxins). When these cells are
stimulated by proinflammatory signals, they secrete substantial amounts of proinflammatory cytokines,
ramping up the signals for inflammation in the entire body. This is why obesity is associated with
increased systemic inflammation (bodywide, generalized inflammation) and may be the link between
obesity and cardiovascular disease. So losing weight (if you are overweight) will help resolve
inflammation.
      However, losing weight and healing are often competing goals. Most people who want to lose
weight will limit calories, fat, carbohydrates, or various combinations of them, which probably limits
their intake of nutrients as well. Healing from autoimmune disease requires extra nutrition, not less:
extra vitamins, minerals, healthy fats, amino acids, and antioxidants. You can supply your body with
extra nutrients without extra calories by choosing the most nutrient-dense foods available (such as
organ meat, seafood, and vegetables).
      If you are considerably overweight and have an autoimmune disease, you should focus on
healing your body first and worry about losing weight later. However, it is extremely likely that your
body will naturally shed most of those extra pounds as you restore normal levels of the various
micronutrients, as your gut heals, as your immune system becomes better regulated, and as your
hormones and neurotransmitters return to normal levels, sensitivities, and rhythmicity. Every single
recommendation in this book—from eating a nutrient-dense diet devoid of foods that irritate the gut
and activate the immune system; to supporting optimal digestion and spacing out your meals; to
managing stress, protecting your circadian rhythms, prioritizing sleep, and increasing low to
moderately intense exercise—will contribute to your body’s desire to be a healthy weight. Every
single recommendation in this book will help normalize your hormones, which are not only important
regulators of the immune system but also influence your hunger, metabolism, energy levels, and even
your motivation. Basically, if you are overweight, there’s nothing more you need to do beyond
complying with the Paleo Approach to lose weight: your body will do it naturally.
      Some people who are overweight experience a big weight loss when they first adopt the Paleo
Approach. Others find that their weight creeps up before weight loss kicks in. The latter response is
typically a result of micronutrient deficiencies and hormone regulation when you first start on this
journey. If your body is starved for nutrition (which is likely if you have an autoimmune disease) and
your insulin, leptin, ghrelin, and cortisol are all dysregulated (also likely if you have an autoimmune
disease or are overweight), your body’s first response is to hold on to all the energy and nutrition you
consume when you first start giving it good food. This response is typically short-lived, especially if
you are doing a good job of managing stress, prioritizing sleep, and getting some mild to moderately
intense activity (all factors that help hormones become better regulated quickly). If your weight
continues to creep upward or the pounds simply won’t come off despite complete compliance with
the approach, some troubleshooting may be in order (see chapter 8).
      When losing weight on the Paleo Approach, it is also very common for people’s weight to
stabilize ten to thirty pounds higher than they would ideally like. This may reflect the need for more
changes in lifestyle factors to better regulate hormones. Or it may reflect the fact that your body
knows what a healthy weight is better than you do. Our desired weight often reflects (frequently
misguided) cultural values about what is beautiful. Body mass index (BMI) charts in the doctor’s
office aren’t particularly helpful in determining a healthy weight, either. Your BMI is based on only
two numbers: your weight and your height. This means that your BMI does not take into account how
much of your body is composed of muscle or bone or fat. (For example, a body builder would have a
BMI that places him in the overweight or obese category simply because muscle weighs a lot, causing
him to be “too heavy” for his height.) Nor does your BMI take into account where your fat is stored,
which is more important in terms of overall health than how much of it there is (visceral fat having a
far greater impact on, say, risk for cardiovascular disease than subcutaneous fat). Instead of obsessing
over reaching a certain weight, evaluate how you feel. Is your disease in remission? Do you enjoy
being active? Do you have energy throughout the day and sleep well at night? Do you feel comfortable
in your clothes? Do you feel happy and healthy? These are far more significant metrics of weight-loss
success than a number on the scale.
      The thought that the Paleo Approach is conducive to weight loss may concern those who are a
normal weight or underweight, especially those who are dangerously underweight. It isn’t that the
Paleo Approach is conducive to weight loss per se, but rather that it is conducive to weight
normalization. While this protocol may naturally lead to weight loss in overweight people, it may
naturally lead to weight maintenance for those at a normal weight and to weight gain for the
underweight.
      The biggest obstacle to gaining weight is typically digestion. While hormone dysregulation can
still be a significant factor in the unhealthy weight loss suffered by many people with autoimmune
disease, malnutrition is typically the dominant cause. And addressing malnutrition is essential not
only for achieving a healthy weight, but also for proper immune system regulation. If you are
seriously underweight, adding digestive-support supplements (see here) and focusing on the most
nutrient-dense foods (organ meat, fish, and vegetables) may be exceptionally helpful. If raw
vegetables are difficult for you to digest, eating just cooked vegetables, at least initially, may be
helpful. Fish, organ meats, and braised or slow-cooked meats are also generally easier to digest than
other protein sources and can help correct micronutrient deficiencies more quickly. Also, spacing out
your meals may not be appropriate: as mentioned previously, in the case of severe gastrointestinal
damage, eating more frequently (again, at least initially) may place less of a strain on the digestive
tract (see here). Supplements to help restore gut-barrier function may also be beneficial (see here).
      Another obstacle to gaining weight may be dysregulated hunger signals. You may not be eating
enough if you’re not feeling hungry (which might be caused by leptin or cortisol dysregulation or
both). This should correct itself as your body heals, but focusing on eating very energy-dense foods
may be helpful initially to ensure that you are consuming enough calories to support healing and
healthful weight gain. This means chowing down fat sources with every meal, potentially even eating
spoonfuls of healthful fats (pastured lard, grass-fed tallow, coconut oil, olive oil, etc.) to increase the
energy density of your meals. (If this causes gastrointestinal distress, consider gallbladder-support
and digestive-enzyme supplements; see here.) Also, consuming carbohydrates with every meal (in the
form of starchy vegetables or fruit, depending on your preference and tolerance) is important for
weight gain, since insulin facilitates energy storage. Protein is, of course, still essential.
      Just as lifestyle factors are key for regulating the hormones that control hunger and energy if
you’re overweight, they are also key if you’re underweight. Make positive changes to support sleep,
stress management, circadian rhythms, and activity a priority.
      If you are dangerously underweight, working with a qualified health care professional to assess
potential confounding factors, such as persistent infections or the need for organ-function support
(both discussed in chapter 8), may also be needed. She can also assess the energy and nutrient content
of your diet and identify any areas that might be improved or recommend supplements or medications
if appropriate (again, see chapter 8).
FAQs

It is impossible to predict every question you might have, but with any luck you’ll find the
answers you are seeking here.


What If I Give In and Eat a Slice of Pizza ?

You may fall off the wagon for a second. Sometimes it’s a conscious choice. For example, maybe you
were visiting friends and forgot to tell them about your dietary restrictions. They served pizza, and
you decided to indulge instead of waiting until you got home to eat. Maybe you simply gave in to a
strong craving. Sometimes it’s accidental exposure. For example, maybe you asked your farmer for a
complete list of spices in his pastured-pork sausage, and it all sounded great, but he forgot to tell you
about the red pepper. Maybe you were eating out, and even though you told the waiter you were
gluten-free, the pan-seared chicken had still been dredged in flour (which can be hard to notice until
it’s too late). No one’s perfect (shhhhh!), so if you fall off the wagon, don’t beat yourself up—just
climb right back on.
      If you do eat something that wasn’t a good choice, you may feel lousy, which is especially likely
if it was gluten but is possible with any foods excluded from the Paleo Approach. You might
experience gastrointestinal symptoms, headaches, fatigue, acne or other skin problems, mood issues
(including depression and anxiety), sleep disturbances, joint and muscle aches, or general
crumminess. You may also experience a worsening of any symptoms of your disease. You might not
necessarily associate these symptoms with food, so it’s important to be very aware of how you feel
after eating something that is outside the Paleo Approach dietary regimen.
      For some people, the symptoms are immediate and obvious. You may feel uncomfortable for
only a couple of hours after exposure. Others may feel uncomfortable for days or weeks. Still others
may have full-blown flares. Having obvious, severe, and immediate symptoms actually makes it much
easier to make a better choice or to take more precautions next time.

          “Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.”
          —CONFUCIUS

      For some people, the symptoms are delayed and subtle and become obvious only when they’ve
been off the wagon for a significant amount of time. This is actually much more difficult, because you
can talk yourself into believing that a specific food didn’t negatively affect you, even though it
absolutely did. You might have reintroduced a few different foods, and by the time you realize that
you are experiencing repercussions, it’s hard to tell what’s the culprit. (This is discussed further in
chapter 9.)
      You may actually have an immediate and severe reaction to some foods and a slow-buildup
reaction to others.
      So what do you do if you do have an “oops”? Whether you consciously ate something you
shouldn’t have or you were accidentally exposed to a food you know you can’t handle, whether it was
a one-time thing or you were off-program for a while, the most important thing is to get back with the
program as quickly as possible: eat the cleanest, strictest, and most nutrient-dense foods you can,
including glycine-rich foods, organ meats, fish, lots of vegetables of every color—which is what you
now know you need to do to heal. Get even more sleep (perhaps aiming for ten to twelve hours a
night or even more for the first few days or even weeks). Make absolutely certain that stress is not an
issue for you.
      If you completely fall off the wagon, you need to question why. What is holding you back? Why
is it such a challenge to comply? Do you need more support? More sleep? Do you need to find more
quick meals or go-to snacks that can be at the ready at all times? Do you need to try some new recipes
to make your food more palatable? Do you need to work with a functional-medicine specialist to
assess micronutrient deficiencies (common culprits behind cravings)? Do you just need to muscle
through the adjustment? Do you need better stress-management strategies? (Stress is probably the
number one reason people can’t comply with the Paleo Approach.) Figure out where you are stuck
and what you need to do to make the Paleo Approach work for you so you can get back on-program
and stay there!


How Do I Eat in Restaurants? Or When I Travel ?

It can be tricky to be on such a restricted diet and eat out, but it is possible. It helps to know exactly
which foods you can totally tolerate, which ones you can tolerate in small, occasional amounts, and
which are totally verboten for you (information that you can glean only from experience on the Paleo
Approach and by following the procedures for reintroductions discussed in chapter 9).
      If you are going out to eat, it’s a good idea to call ahead and make sure that the restaurant can
accommodate you. For most people, remaining gluten-free will be the top priority, but other foods
may be just as problematic autoimmune triggers for you, like GMO grains, soy, peanuts, and
nightshades. This is why knowing what line you personally cannot cross is key to navigating
restaurants. Fortunately, many restaurants are developing gluten-free menus and have gluten-free
workspaces to cater to those with celiac disease or gluten sensitivity. There are also a growing
number of Paleo-friendly restaurants, most of which can easily accommodate additional restrictions.
      It is important to have an open dialogue with your server. Explain which foods you cannot eat.
(Even if they’re not technically allergies, it can sometimes be helpful to couch them as such to get
people to take your needs seriously.) Make sure to ask specific questions: Is that meat dredged in
flour before cooking? Which fats or oils are used? Is there any dairy in that salad dressing? What
seasonings are used? Find out which dishes can be made to order—Can you get a steak without
seasoning, or are the steaks preseasoned? Can you get a hamburger without the bun?—and ask if the
chef is amenable to making something off the menu for you (a good question to ask before you arrive).
      Certain foods are more likely to be “safe” than others. Generally, grilled or roasted meats,
grilled or poached seafood, salads (ask for dressing on the side), and grilled or steamed vegetables
can all be ordered with much greater certainty of being mostly Paleo Approach–friendly. (They might
not be cooked in the best-quality fats and may contain some seed-based spices, but most people can
tolerate these on occasion, especially once they have been on the plan for long enough to have
experienced substantial improvement in their disease.)
      When it comes to eating at someone else’s house, you should talk to your host. Explain what you
can’t eat (and also what you can!). Make sure that your host understands which foods might be hidden
sources of gluten (like bottled sauces) and which spices are safe for you. It can also help to offer to
bring something you can eat (maybe a protein if you know that will be hardest for your host to
prepare, or a side dish or dessert to share).
      Traveling can be a challenge as well. For a road trip, it’s best to haul out and stock the cooler so
you know you’ll have good eats along the way. If it’s a long trip and you have to hit the grocery store
to top off your supplies, look for rotisserie chickens (check the seasonings!), some deli meats (check
the ingredients!), canned fish or tuna in pouches, raw vegetables, and fruit. If you can make (root-
vegetable chips, roasted meats, homemade sausage, steamed vegetables, etc.) or buy (jerky made with
only meat and salt, plantain chips cooked in a good fat, dried or freeze-dried fruit or vegetables)
some things beforehand, road trips are totally manageable. (There are also slow cookers and
microwaves that you can plug into your car to reheat food.)
     Many of the same “convenience” foods work for air travel. If you are traveling internationally,
check regulations ahead of time to find out which food items you can bring on the plane. (Generally
speaking, nonperishables such as dried fruit, packaged plantain or sweet potato chips, and canned fish
are OK.) Depending on whether you technically cross the border before your flight or afterward, you
might bring perishable food on the plane but toss any leftovers before going through customs. Eat a
large meal before you leave home and have a plan for how to source good food once you arrive at
your destination: if you’re staying at someone’s house, talk to your host ahead of time; if you’re
staying at a hotel, scope out the closest grocery store or specialty stores ahead of time. If you’re
staying at a hotel, spending a little extra for a room with a mini fridge or, better yet, a kitchenette will
make your life much more pleasant. Then all you have to do is bring a paring knife or a pocket knife
(in your checked baggage!), a can opener, and maybe even a jar or two of your favorite fat or oil,
seasoning mix, or good-quality salt, and you will have it made in the shade in terms of sticking with
the Paleo Approach far from home. And it never hurts to pack some emergency food, whatever that is
for you—maybe just a jar of coconut oil or a few cans of sardines.




Looking for more great tips on navigating restaurants?
Check out Practical Paleo, by Diane Sanfilippo!



      The bottom line is that the best way to eat well away from home is similar to eating well at
home: plan ahead. And do a little troubleshooting before you’re in trouble: What will you do if your
plane is delayed? If you arrive at your friend’s house and discover that he marinated the pork in
barbecue sauce that contains gluten? If the grocery store is closed by the time you get to your hotel? In
some cases, not eating will be a better choice for you than eating a food that you know will cause an
increase in symptoms. In other cases, eating a suboptimal food will be a better choice than enduring
the stress of not eating. And you can avoid both of those contingencies by packing some emergency
food.

My Tests for Food Sensitivities Were Negative. Can I Eat Whatever
I Want ?
If you were recently tested for a food allergy or sensitivity and the test was negative, you may be
wondering if it’s OK for you to eat that food even though it’s on the avoid list in chapter 2. I’m sorry
to have to say so, but it’s still better not to eat those foods. If you reread that chapter (I know you are
dying to!), you will realize that all the foods excluded from the Paleo Approach can contribute to your
disease in ways that will not show up on allergy or sensitivity tests.
     The only exception is egg yolks. If you have a test showing without a doubt that you are not
sensitive to egg yolks, then you can definitely include them in your diet. (Egg whites are a different
story and should be avoided even if you test negative for them; see here.)
     And it should go without saying, but I’ll say it anyway: if you test positive for any of the good
foods to eat in chapter 5, you should not eat them. This is especially true when it comes to food
allergies. Regarding food sensitivities, whether you eliminate the foods or not will depend partly on
how strong the sensitivity is. If you have a leaky gut, many foods will test positive on a food-
sensitivity screen, and excluding those foods may not be necessary in that case. Working with a
medical professional to interpret the results is the best strategy for determining exactly which foods
should be avoided.

Can You Follow the Paleo Approach While You’re Pregnant or
Lactating ?

The answer is yes! Absolutely! You will not miss out on a single nutrient your body needs to support
the growth and development of your baby. In fact, you will be consuming only the most nutrient-dense
foods available, and it’s pretty hard to beat that. If you have an autoimmune disease that goes into
remission while you’re pregnant, following the Paleo Approach may help reduce the severity of the
flare once your baby is born (see here) or even head it off altogether.
      If you get morning sickness, broth, bananas, applesauce, fish (as you’ve learned, the protein is
very easy to digest), well-cooked meats (think stews or braised meats), and vegetables (again, think
stews) will be the easiest on your delicate stomach. Ginger is a powerful antiemetic. Avoid
peppermint tea, which can actually relax the lower esophageal sphincter (as can caffeine, alcohol,
chocolate, smoking, and high-fat meals). This can make heartburn, nausea, and vomiting worse.
Protein can actually help tighten it. Fresh papaya or papaya-enzyme supplements are often
recommended for heartburn and morning sickness: papaya contains proteolytic enzymes, which
improve digestion (see here).
Can Kids Follow the Paleo Approach ?

The Paleo Approach is absolutely appropriate for children with autoimmune diseases, with two
caveats: kids typically do better with a higher carbohydrate intake than adults, and kids need to snack.
     When it comes to macronutrient ratios for young children, the composition of human breast milk
gives pretty good clues as to what optimal carbohydrate, fat, and protein intake ought to be, since in
prehistoric cultures children probably received at least some breast milk until the age of four or five.
The amounts of different macronutrients in human breast milk are quite variable, depending on the
mother’s diet, the amount the baby nurses, and the baby’s age. There seems to be some signaling from
the baby to the mother, and it is very likely that much of this variability reflects the specific dietary
needs of the baby. The carbohydrate content of human breast milk ranges from 57 to 70 percent (as a
percentage of total milk solids). Fat makes up 28 to 39 percent and protein about 7 to 10 percent.
Translating this into caloric intake, the carbohydrate content of human breast milk is 40 to 55 percent.
This is all to say that it’s okay if your child eats a lot of carbohydrates. On average, children’s
carbohydrate needs tend to decrease as they get older (with protein especially taking its place).




     Just as I am not a fan of counting macronutrients for adults, I don’t think it’s necessary for
children, either. Most children crave what their bodies need and cycle between preferences for one
macronutrient over another as specific needs for carbohydrates, fats, and proteins vary with growth
spurts, developmental spurts, and age. Total caloric intake also varies hugely with growth spurts,
developmental spurts, and age. As a general rule, present your child with healthy options that comply
with the Paleo Approach, and don’t worry about how much she eats of what.
     Kids also have much faster metabolisms than adults and do need to eat more frequently. (Think
about how often a baby nurses, for example.) It’s fine to give your child snacks if he’s hungry.
     The biggest challenge of following the Paleo Approach for children is truly the emotional aspect
of being on a restricted diet. Depending on your child’s age, it may be difficult to explain to her why
she cannot eat a specific food (especially when it comes to birthday parties and playdates). Make a
contingency plan so your child has an acceptable substitute.
     Making sure that your child complies when away from home may be challenging, especially if
your child is too young to really understand which foods are OK to eat and which are not. Informing
your child’s teacher or principal and any other adults responsible for supervision (nannies,
babysitters, family members, friends, neighbors) of your child’s dietary requirements is imperative. In
some circumstances, a doctor’s note will be required: many preschools and schools cannot provide
special foods without one. And always send appropriate food with your child (to school, to a
playdate, to your brother’s house).

Should Your Child Follow the Paleo Approach If You Have an
Autoimmune Disease But He Doesn’t ?

Concerns that your child is at risk of developing an autoimmune disease because you have one are
certainly valid. And you may be wondering if the Paleo Approach can be used as a prophylactic for
your child. While it is an absolutely powerful protocol for preventing autoimmune disease, the Paleo
Approach is unnecessarily restrictive for most healthy children. Instead, if your child follows a
standard Paleo diet most of the time and is gluten-free when away from home, and you encourage
healthy lifestyle habits (like playing outside and going to bed early), that will probably keep
autoimmune disease at bay even if your child is genetically predisposed to it (but is otherwise
healthy). Focusing on nutrient density and other aspects of the Paleo Approach are also appropriate to
add to the Paleo mix for children likely to have genetic risk factors for autoimmune disease, including
eating fish, eating offal, eating a variety of vegetables and fruit, and eating fermented foods.




The Emotional Struggle of Autoimmune Disease
From the first onset of symptoms, to the medical tests (sometimes extensive and invasive), to the
diagnosis (and prognosis), and then to the management of your disease (drug side effects, impact on
your lifestyle, etc.), autoimmune disease is one nasty roller coaster—and we all want off. It is not
unreasonable to want to throw a tantrum on the floor of your doctor’s office. It’s OK to cry. It’s OK to
be angry. It’s OK to resent your pain and look for things or people to blame. Yes, it’s OK to grieve.
It’s also OK to completely resent my suggestions for making such drastic changes to your diet and
lifestyle in order to heal your disease.
      As if having an autoimmune disease isn’t enough, following the Paleo Approach may mean
giving up some of your favorite foods. It may mean giving up some hobbies or socializing so you can
sleep more. It may mean feeling like an alien at a business meeting where there’s a big platter of
doughnuts or at a local pub when you can’t have a (real!) drink with your friends. Yes, having an
autoimmune disease is tough. Yes, following a restricted diet and having different lifestyle priorities
than your peers is tough (maybe even tougher).
      It’s OK to feel frustrated and irritated with this book. But it’s also important to come to a place
of acceptance—to accept the circumstances of your disease and the effort you will have to make to
overcome it. Once again, support from others will be critical. If you can’t get the emotional support
you need from your family, friends, or your physical and virtual communities, think about finding a
counselor, therapist, or psychiatrist.

When Compliance Becomes Orthorexia

When you have an autoimmune disease, it is easy to become paranoid about exposure to foods that
“might hurt you”—especially after I’ve been emphasizing that 100 percent compliance will be
necessary for many people to see results. And if you have had the experience of an accidental
exposure that made you very ill, your paranoia is well justified! However, it is important to maintain
a healthy attitude toward food and not to let the idea of exposure to a “bad food” become an
obsession. It’s OK if one day your fructose intake is a little high. It’s OK to have an occasional treat
(especially if you can keep it within general Paleo Approach guidelines). It’s OK if you don’t eat
organ meat even once one week, or if you eat broccoli four days in a row. Fixating on food choices,
perseverating on details, or overstressing about meals is not healthy. It is not the intention of the Paleo
Approach to turn food into yet another cause for stress in your life.
     Orthorexia is an eating disorder in which people develop an excessive preoccupation with
avoiding foods perceived to be unhealthful. When foods really do make you sick, the line between
being proactive about your health and feeding a morbid obsession with eating only “healthy foods”
can be a fine one. Be aware of how your attitude toward food is affected by reading this book and
how it evolves as you implement the Paleo Approach protocol. If you suspect that your attitude is
becoming unhealthy, find someone you can confide in and talk through your feelings with to get some
perspective.

How Do I Eat This Way Without Making My Family Suffer?
If your family does not want to follow the Paleo Approach, the person who will face the biggest
challenges is you—because there will be tempting (i.e., off-plan) foods around, and you will need to
exercise more discipline than someone who can simply throw out all the bad stuff before embarking
on this journey. But there are some tricks to making this work.
   Have snacks and treats that comply with the Paleo Approach on hand. Sometimes watching
your kids or spouse eat something you (used to) love but (now) know isn’t good for you can be
overwhelming. If you are tired or stressed, you might not be able to summon enough willpower to
keep from wanting to grab some of whatever your family is enjoying. So have a delicious alternative
within reach. You might enjoy fruit with coconut cream drizzled on top, or plantain chips, or bacon.
Perhaps you can even entice your family to share a Paleo Approach–worthy treat with you.




   Compartmentalize your meals. This strategy is the opposite of making a one-pot meal. Instead,
think of making a meal with multiple components (meat, green veggie, starchy veggie, salad, fruit,
etc.). This way you can make most of a family meal compliant with the Paleo Approach and simply
avoid what isn’t or swap it out for something that is just for you. For example, you could make roast
beef with mashed potatoes, roasted carrots, and steamed broccoli. You can either abstain from the
potatoes or swap them for some mashed cauliflower or roasted butternut squash. If you’re making
pasta for supper, make a pesto sauce using fresh basil, garlic, olive oil, and a dash of pink salt (you
won’t miss the pine nuts or Parmesan). You can pour it over conventional noodles (and maybe some
grilled chicken and sautéed veggies) for your family but over a noodle substitute (roasted spaghetti
squash, sautéed spiralized zucchini, braised shredded cabbage, steamed broccoli slaw, or kelp
noodles) for yourself.
   Make some of your family meals completely compliant with the Paleo Approach. As you gain
more confidence working with new ingredients, you and your family will quickly see that you can still
enjoy delicious foods. Many of your old favorites might need only a minor change to be Paleo
Approach–friendly. Your family might not even notice that your grilled chicken no longer has pepper
on it or that you’ve swapped canola oil for coconut oil when you fry up some veggies. So don’t be
afraid to feed them the same foods you eat.
   Leftovers and freezer meals are your friends. There will surely be nights when your family
wants to order pizza or eat an eggplant frittata. Make sure that you are armed with leftovers or
something in the freezer for you to enjoy instead.
      It may initially take a bit of thought and some experimenting to figure out how to make this work
for both you and your family. You may have to develop some coping strategies to avoid temptation
(like going for a walk while your family eats ice cream cones at the mall). Talking with your family
so that you can approach your healing as a team may also be very useful. You might be surprised by
just how supportive they can be.

How to Explain Your Diet to Friends, Family, and Strangers

It is a fairly common experience to encounter people who don’t (yet) understand how powerful
nutrition can be in disease management. A conversation about why you eat the way you do is a great
opportunity to share what you now know about the role that food (and sleep and stress) plays in
health. Your willingness to share your experience may help someone else recover his health.
Unfortunately, it is also fairly common to encounter people who just aren’t ready to accept that giving
up multigrain bread can make you healthier. Conversations with these people may leave you feeling
frustrated, defensive, and as though you need to justify how you eat. But you don’t need to explain
your choices to anyone—especially if what you’re doing is working! In which case, if you feel you
have to say something, you can simply say, “This works for me.” End of story. Or you may say
something vague about allergies or food sensitivities to avoid a lengthy debate, and that’s OK, too. If
you do find yourself becoming engaged in philosophical debates about food that aren’t likely to go
anywhere, then share this book. That’s one of the reasons I belabored the science—not just to help
you understand why it’s important to improve your diet and lifestyle, but also to enable you talk
knowledgeably about it to others.

        “People who say it cannot be done should not interrupt those who are doing it.”
     —GEORGE BERNARD SHAW




Handling Setbacks


          “It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.”
          —CONFUCIUS

The truly unfortunate (not to mention frustrating) thing about autoimmune disease is that flares can
occur for many reasons—some obvious, some not. As already discussed, there is no cure for
autoimmune disease. The Paleo Approach is a powerful healing strategy, but it can’t make the
possibility of flares disappear for good. Flares are often predictable and their causes fairly apparent.
Perhaps you became more stressed than normal. Perhaps you recently altered your diet or made a
lifestyle change. Even changes made with good intentions can end up having a negative impact. For
example, perhaps you wanted to get into better shape and bumped up your exercise routine, but the
increased intensity created so much stress on your body that it caused a flare. Perhaps you were
accidentally exposed to gluten. Perhaps a new job has you sleeping less. Perhaps the culprit is as
simple as an infection, or maybe a cold that is going around. And occasionally, a flare may have no
obvious cause.
      These types of hurdles can make you want to tear your hair out. But the most important thing is
not to blame yourself (or anyone else, for that matter). Being stressed about what you did “wrong” is
only going to hinder your recovery. Flares are opportunities to reevaluate how you are eating,
sleeping, and managing stress and your activity level. Even if you’ve been doing everything right, a
flare probably means that you need to tweak some aspect of your life, such as getting even more
sleep, increasing your mild-intensity activity, or upping the amount of nutrient-dense seafood, organ
meats, and vegetables you eat.
Set Yourself Up for Success
This chapter was designed to make sure that your transition is as smooth as possible, that your healing
is as rapid as possible, and that you maintain the ability to stick with the program for as long as
necessary. Exactly how you ensure your own success will be up to you, but most people will need to
think about both the emotional and the practical aspects of following the Paleo Approach. This might
be as simple as approaching this journey with optimism instead of skepticism. Studies of cancer
patients have shown that a sense of hope (which is technically different from a feeling of optimism)
may improve survival. (Optimism improves quality of life but does not affect survival rates.)
Conversely, depression decreases survival. This goes beyond the placebo effect (in which the belief
that you are being treated leads to improvement in symptoms) and may work directly through the HPA
axis (recall that cortisol is a potent immune modulator; see here). Having a positive outlook can be
challenging at first, depending on the severity of your disease and how it has impacted your life, but it
will be much easier as you start to see improvements.
      Take some time to think about exactly what you will need to ensure success. You’ll want to
make sure that your home is bursting with quality foods and that you organize your day to allow
adequate time for cooking, physical activity, and sleeping. If it helps, make a list. Not just a shopping
list (although that can be very useful, too), but a list of both tangible and intangible things you need to
do or set up or even just think about before you start or as you transition. Taking a little extra time to
make sure that you have your support network in place and that you have a solid plan first will
definitely improve your chances of immediate success.
      It does get easier. As you become accustomed to new foods, new lifestyle priorities, and a new
approach to life in general, less effort is required. Cooking food and balancing meals for yourself
versus for your family won’t be such a big deal. Eating new foods and avoiding your old favorites
will stop feeling like a hardship and instead become a comfortable habit. You will gladly tear
yourself away from social media to go to bed earlier because you know how much better you will
feel in the morning. You will enjoy how you feel after a walk or some mindful meditation, and you
won’t have to think twice about carving out time for these activities. As I am very fond of reminding
myself from time to time, it’s only effort until it’s routine.
      As you embark on this journey, know that you are not alone. Know that the Paleo Approach is a
powerful and comprehensive strategy for managing autoimmune disease. And know that you can do it.
You are now ready to begin!
Chapter 7 Review


   There is no cure for autoimmune disease, but the Paleo Approach may enable you to enjoy
   lifelong remission.




   There are two methods for transitioning to the Paleo Approach—jumping in with both feet or
   taking it one step at a time—each with its own advantages and disadvantages. Choose the
   method that best fits your personality and individual circumstances.




   Success on the Paleo Approach means striking a balance between compliance and sustainability.




   You may experience a variety of symptoms during the first month of transition as your body
   adapts to the Paleo Approach and begins to heal.




   The amount of time it takes to see improvement on the Paleo Approach varies from person to
   person.




   The Paleo Approach will help normalize your weight if you are overweight or underweight.




   The Paleo Approach is appropriate for pregnant and lactating women and children with
   autoimmune disease.
Setting yourself up for success on the Paleo Approach means making physical as well as
emotional preparations before you start.
Chapter 8
Troubleshooting
          “ Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to
          stop questioning.”
          —ALBERT EINSTEIN, Relativity: The Special and the General Theory


How autoimmune disease develops and progresses varies from person to person. Two people may
suffer from celiac disease that causes malnutrition, have similar gastrointestinal symptoms, and be
dangerously underweight—and to many physicians, it is as simple as diagnosing celiac disease and
recommending a gluten-free diet. End of story. However, one of those people may be more deficient
in fat-soluble vitamins, while the other one is more deficient in magnesium and zinc. These subtleties
affect how the body responds to diet and lifestyle changes and how quickly the body heals. The
differences among people create a complex set of factors that make each person’s disease so
distinctive that it is impossible to predict how long healing will take or how rigidly each person will
have to adhere to the protocol outlined in this book.

This is not a one-size-fits-all program. As you already know, there are as many ways to implement
the Paleo Approach as there are people who could benefit from it. Some people may encounter extra
challenges and have to do some troubleshooting to circumvent them. How do you know if you’re one
of those people? If you are completely compliant with the Paleo Approach and don’t experience some
improvements within two to three months, some tweaking is probably in order.




I’m going to deal with the most common issues that might arise as you implement the Paleo Approach
and offer tips on adjusting your food or activities to deal with them, but in certain circumstances you
may need to seek professional medical advice. When it comes to evaluating whether the supplements
you’re taking are working or whether you need different ones, consulting with your doctor or another
health care provider is essential. Likewise, if you don’t experience substantive improvement on the
Paleo Approach (or if progress is slower than you think it should be), you should have a medical
practitioner run additional tests, examine the details of your specific condition and family history, and
guide you through appropriate modifications to address your unique challenges.
When to Start Troubleshooting

If you have been absolutely compliant with the Paleo Approach for three months and nothing seems to
have changed, don’t give up.
     The first question to ask yourself is whether you are doing everything in your power to fully
implement the protocol. Be honest: Are you following the diet recommendations to the letter? Do you
double-check the label on everything you’re consuming that has a label, including spices? Are you
eating nutrient-dense foods (like liver)? Are you getting enough sleep and managing your stress? Are
you spending time outside in the sun and keeping your light exposure in the evening to a minimum?
Are you incorporating physical activity into your life?
     If the answer to all these questions is yes, then it’s time to dig a little deeper and figure out what
else you need to deal with in order to heal.

          “ He who takes medicine and neglects diet wastes the skills of the physician.”
          —CHINESE PROVERB




     The Bristol Stool Form Scale
Type 1          Separate hard lumps, like nuts (hard to pass)
Type 2          Sausage-shaped but lumpy
Type 3          Like a sausage but with cracks on its surface
Type 4          Like a sausage or snake, smooth and soft
Type 5          Soft blobs with clear-cut edges (passed easily)
Type 6          Fluffy pieces with ragged edges, a mushy stool
Type 7          Watery, no solid pieces, Entirely liquid
Poor Digestion

Optimal digestion relies on thoroughly chewing your food (see here), on adequate production of
stomach acid (see here), on adequate production and secretion of bile and pancreatic enzymes, on
having a healthy gut barrier (including healthy enterocytes, healthy gut morphology, and a normal
thickness of the mucus layer; see here), on normal levels of the hormones and neurotransmitters
required for digestion (see here), and on normal levels, diversity, and location of gut microflora (see
here). When you are embarking on the Paleo Approach, chances are pretty good that not all these
parts of the digestion puzzle are in place—if they were, you probably wouldn’t have an autoimmune
disease!

          “Bad digestion is the root of all evil.”
          —HIPPOCRATES

      As you know, most of the recommendations in this book are aimed at healing the gut and
restoring normal digestion. However, having a severely damaged gut can be a giant roadblock on the
road to healing, in large part because when you aren’t digesting properly, you aren’t absorbing the
nutrients from your food that your body needs to heal, and you are supplying your gut microorganisms
with a banquet to feast on.
      This isn’t to say that you can’t heal your gut completely and improve the efficiency of your
digestion just by persistently following the Paleo Approach. You absolutely can. But taking digestive-
support supplements, especially when you first transition, may accelerate your healing and make your
transition smoother. Many of the other potential challenges discussed in this chapter will become
moot once your digestive tract is working properly.
      Whether you take digestive-support supplements when you first adopt the Paleo Approach is
completely up to you. Many people find that simply by changing their diet and lifestyle, their digestion
improves big-time. But if you know that you are “digestively challenged,” or if you have been
following the protocol for a while without substantial improvement, this is where your
troubleshooting should start.
      There are certain dead giveaways that you need digestive-support supplements, including
constipation, diarrhea, being able to identify intact food particles in your stool (especially if they’re
large), regularly having floating stool, acid reflux (heartburn), bloating, excessive flatulence, and
stomachaches after eating. Ideally, your stool should be a type 4 on the Bristol Stool Form Scale (see
adjacent), although anywhere from 3 to 5 is generally considered normal (and it’s not a big deal if the
occasional bowel movement is not ideal). If your stools can most often be categorized as types 1, 2,
6, or 7, digestive-support supplements may prove exceedingly helpful.
      Having large, intact food particles in your stool is also a sign that you need to relax, eat more
slowly, and chew your food more thoroughly. It may be helpful to eat only cooked fruits and
vegetables (at least until the quality of your stool improves) while also taking digestive-support
supplements.
      There are three main types of digestive-support supplements—stomach-acid supplements,
gallbladder-support supplements, and digestive enzymes—each with different effects, each
appropriate for different people (although some people may benefit from taking two, or even all,
types). Some of them are contraindicated in some circumstances, so make sure that you understand
whether a specific supplement is right for you—and the best way to ensure that is to consult with a
medical professional. Beyond supplements specifically aimed at improving digestion, probiotic
supplements may also be beneficial (especially if you are not eating many fermented foods; see here).




     Check Your Supplement Labels!




Many supplements contain gluten, wheat, corn, soy, dairy, and/or yeast, either as a result of the
manufacturing process, as fillers, or as capsule ingredients. Read your labels carefully. Most
manufacturers will explicitly state if their product does not contain these ingredients. If you aren’t
sure whether a supplement contains ingredients that may be a problem for you, contact the
manufacturer or select a different brand.




Stomach-Acid Supplements

Stomach acid is critical not just in the initial phases of digestion (such as to denature proteins) but
also in proper signaling to the gallbladder to release bile and to the pancreas to release digestive
enzymes. Thus, ensuring adequate production of stomach acid can make a huge difference in the
efficiency of digestion all the way down the line. Addressing deficiencies in levels of stomach acid
can typically correct many gastrointestinal symptoms that you might not intuitively link to a lack of
stomach acid. As already discussed, many of the symptoms of low stomach acid are often
misinterpreted as signs of too much stomach acid (see here). The first step is to stop taking any
medications (prescription and nonprescription) that reduce the acidity of your stomach acid or reduce
stomach-acid production (see here).
      Practicing good meal hygiene can also profoundly improve stomach-acid production (see here).
In particular, decrease the amount of fluid you drink with your meals (because it dilutes stomach acid)
and instead consume most of your liquids at other times throughout the day. You may also find that
drinking a mildly acidic beverage (such as carbonated water with some lemon or lime juice; see
here), if you do drink with meals, or consuming acidic foods (such as fermented foods, citrus fruits,
or pineapple) with your meals is beneficial. Because low stomach acid can be caused by chronic
stress, you must address this lifestyle factor (see here and here). Alcohol consumption can also
reduce stomach-acid production, so if you have been rationalizing continued consumption of
alcoholic beverages (see here), it’s time to stop. Also, certain bacterial infections can decrease
stomach acid, which is another thing to discuss with your health care provider. Your need for
stomach-acid supplements may lessen or disappear completely with these adjustments, but some
supplementation may be required, at least when initially adopting the Paleo Approach.




     If the above modifications don’t do the trick, you have two major options: food-based
supplements or pill-form supplements. Stomach-acid supplements are contraindicated for anyone who
is taking NSAIDs (see here) or corticosteroids (see here), who has a diagnosed blood-clotting
disorder, who has severe esophageal damage due to reflux, who has diagnosed malformations of the
lower esophageal sphincter, or who currently has or has a history of stomach ulcers. They are also
not a good idea for anyone with diagnosed diseases or pathologies affecting the pancreas (because the
pancreas is responsible for producing and secreting sodium bicarbonate to neutralize stomach acid in
the small intestine). If you are not absolutely sure that stomach-acid supplements are appropriate for
you, check with your health care provider. Even if you are sure that taking them will be beneficial,
doing so under medical supervision is still strongly advised. You might also consider having your
stomach-acid production tested by your doctor before taking supplements.
     Food-based supplementation entails taking either raw apple cider vinegar or lemon juice before
meals. With either, take one to two tablespoons straight (like a shot!) or diluted with, or chased by,
one to three tablespoons of water about ten to fifteen minutes before your meal. (Make sure you eat
when your fifteen minutes are up.) Exercise extreme caution with this option if you have a history of
severe gastroesophageal reflux disease: if you have been given a diagnosis of reflux esophagitis,
esophageal strictures, or Barrett’s esophagus, apple cider vinegar and lemon juice are not for you.
     In pill form there are hydrochloric acid supplements (that sounds scary, but that’s actually what
your stomach acid is), typically called Betaine HCl (and sometimes just HCl). The benefits of taking
Betaine HCl are that you can carefully adjust the dose and you aren’t consuming liquid acid that might
burn your esophagus on the way down (as in the case of raw apple cider vinegar or lemon juice).
Betaine HCl supplements typically come in doses of anywhere from 150 to 750 milligrams (the lower
the dose per pill, the easier for you to dial in an optimal dose for your body), and some are combined
with the digestive enzyme pepsin (a protease normally secreted by the cells lining your stomach).
     Optimizing your Betaine HCl dose may take days or even weeks. Don’t rush this process: taking
too much hydrochloric acid can damage your gastrointestinal tract.
                      Start by taking one pill at the beginning of your meal, right when you start eating
                      or even after a few bites. Do not take Betaine HCl with a meal that doesn’t
                      include animal protein.
                     After you have finished eating, notice whether you have any sensations in your
                      upper or lower abdomen, in particular warmth, heaviness, burning, or
                      gastrointestinal distress.
                     Maintain this dose of one pill with each meal for two full days of meals. If you
                      don’t notice any sensations with any of those meals, increase to two pills per
                      meal.
                     Again, maintain two pills per meal for two full days of meals, paying attention to
                      sensations in your abdomen after each meal.
                     Keep increasing the number of pills taken with each meal every two days until
                      you notice some gastrointestinal discomfort or warmth as described in step 2.
                       Once you reach a dose that causes gastrointestinal discomfort or warmth,
                      decrease the dose by one pill. This is your optimal dose.
                     If you reach doses in the range of five thousand to six thousand milligrams per
                      meal without experiencing any sensations in your abdomen whatsoever, discuss
                      the pros and cons of increasing your dose further with a qualified medical
                      professional. Also discuss having your stomach-acid levels tested if they haven’t
                      been tested already.

     If you’ve found just the right dose of your stomach-acid supplement, you should notice a very
rapid improvement in your stool quality.
     Stomach-acid supplements should be a temporary recourse for most people. It is important to be
aware of how your digestion changes over time. As your body’s natural production of stomach acid
increases, the need for supplements will probably gradually decrease. If you start to feel sensations in
your abdomen after eating (even if you’ve been at the same dose of Betaine HCl for a while), adjust
your dose and start taking one pill less with each meal.

Gallbladder-Support Supplements

Gallbladder-support supplements are indicated if your gallbladder has been removed or if you’ve
been given a diagnosis of any gallbladder disease or pathology, any liver disease or pathology (since
the liver synthesizes bile salts), low cholesterol, or any deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamin (see here).
Even if you don’t have a relevant condition, gallbladder-support supplements may be beneficial if
you notice any gastrointestinal symptoms (such as acid reflux, stomachaches, diarrhea, or
constipation) or floating stools after you eat fatty foods.
      The gallbladder stores bile and secretes it in a bolus into the small intestine when it receives the
appropriate signals from the gut. If there’s no gallbladder, or the liver isn’t producing adequate bile,
or the gallbladder can’t empty (because of stones or cholangitis), not enough bile is mixed with foods,
thus preventing you from properly digesting fats. (Fat molecules must be emulsified by bile salts
before lipases, or fat-digesting enzymes, can do their job; see here.) If you don’t digest fats, you
won’t be able to absorb fat-soluble vitamins. Fortunately, you can easily supplement your body’s bile
production with either ox bile or bile salts.
      Ox bile (also called freeze-dried ox bile or ox bile extract) is often combined with other
compounds believed to support gallbladder function, usually pancrelipase (a combination of three
pancreatic digestive enzymes) and beet concentrate (because beets contain betaine, which supports
liver function). Bile salts are purified from ox bile and are usually combined with other compounds to
support gallbladder function.




For more information or guidance, check out Why Stomach Acid Is Good for You: Natural
Relief from Heartburn, Indigestion, Reflux, and GERD, by Jonathan V. Wright, MD, and Lane
Lenard, PhD.



      Each brand of ox bile and bile salts supplements has its own recommended dosage. You may
have to adjust your dosage depending on the fat content of your meals, whether or not you have a
gallbladder, and the health of your liver. If you get diarrhea from taking bile salts, it probably
indicates that you are taking too large a dose (even if you are following the directions on the bottle).
Any unabsorbed bile salts act as a laxative once they reach your colon. So try decreasing the dose. If
you still get diarrhea with a very low dose and are eating large meals, it probably means that you
don’t need this supplement. A medical professional can help you determine whether gallbladder-
support supplements are appropriate for you and optimize your dose, if need be.
      There are many other supplements intended to boost your body’s natural production of bile or to
thin bile and dissolve gallstones. They tend to be controversial, and most have not been vetted in the
scientific literature. Talk to a qualified medical professional about whether they are appropriate for
you before taking them.

Digestive Enzymes
Digestive enzymes (which contain the same enzymes produced by your pancreas) are probably the
most uniformly helpful and safest digestive-support supplements. While stomach-acid supplements
will boost the signals to your pancreas to secrete digestive enzymes, they are contraindicated for
many people. In addition, if the pancreas is stressed because of inflammation, dysregulated blood
sugars, or your autoimmune disease, it simply may not be able to produce enough digestive enzymes
until your body has substantially healed.
      Digestive-enzyme supplements are a good option for those with low stomach acid but for whom
stomach-acid supplementation is contraindicated. They may be used to support digestion for those
with severe gastrointestinal distress and may be equally beneficial for those with minor or no
gastrointestinal symptoms but who want to optimize nutrient absorption from the high-quality food
they are eating. Digestive enzymes may be taken as your lone digestive supplement or with
gallbladder supplements and/or stomach-acid supplements (if needed).
      If you aren’t sure that you would benefit from digestive-support supplements but are looking for
ways to speed healing, digestive enzymes are a great place to start.
      Different manufacturers have different formulas for their supplements, depending on the exact
source of the enzymes. As a general rule, you can expect to find at least a dozen different enzymes in
any given supplement (although they may or may not be explicitly listed). They should include a mix
of:
                   proteases (digestive enzymes that break down protein), such as pepsin
                   lipases (digestive enzymes that break down fat), usually labeled simply as “lipase”
                   carbohydrases (digestive enzymes that break down carbohydrates), which typically
                      include starch-digesting amylases and a variety of enzymes that break tri- and
                      disaccharides into monosaccharides, such as maltase

     Digestive enzymes come from two sources: plants and animals. Plant enzymes, typically
marketed for vegetarians and vegans, contain many enzymes that help break down fiber and other
carbohydrates. These can be helpful for people who suffer from gastrointestinal symptoms (gas,
bloating, diarrhea, constipation) or floating stool after eating fruits or vegetables, especially if they
can identify intact particles of fruits or vegetables in their stool. Plant-enzyme supplements also help
break down proteins, fats, and starches. Bromelain (isolated from pineapple) and papain (isolated
from papaya) are common plant enzymes (and can both be purchased individually). Plant-enzyme
supplements may also contain trace minerals, sometimes explicitly labeled and sometimes not.
     Digestive enzymes from animal sources, usually porcine or bovine pancreas (also labeled as
pancreatin or pancreatic enzymes), contain a different cocktail of digestive enzymes (which are
ancillary to your pancreatic enzymes). They are expressly helpful for digesting proteins and fats, but
also contain amylases for digesting starch. Animal-based digestive-enzyme supplements are
especially beneficial for people who suffer from gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea,
reflux, diarrhea, constipation) after consuming meals heavy in protein or fat (or both). Some
pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements also contain ox bile, and some even hydrochloric acid, so
read the labels carefully!
     Is It Better to Buy an All-in-One?
Some digestive-support supplements contain digestive enzymes and ox bile. There are even brands
that contain digestive enzymes, ox bile, and hydrochloric acid. Consult with a medical professional if
you are considering a combination supplement. As a general rule, taking digestive enzymes, bile salts,
and hydrochloric acid separately gives you more control over the dose of each supplement and
enables you to tailor digestive-support supplements to your specific needs.



      Digestive-enzyme supplements are usually taken immediately before meals (some manufacturers
recommend waiting a minute or two after taking the supplement before you eat) or after taking just a
few bites. As with other digestive-support supplements, make sure to eat after you take them. (Recall
that too many digestive enzymes can damage the gut; see here.) Many manufacturers recommend a
lower dose for vegetarians than for meat-eaters, so read the label carefully. Also, as with other
supplements, it is best to choose a brand whose normal dose is several capsules, which will give you
some control over your dose and enable you to adjust it as necessary to achieve a benefit (talk to your
health care provider if you want to take a dose larger than what is recommended on the label) and
gradually decrease it as your body heals. Plant enzymes and pancreatic digestive enzymes contain
different enzymes, although there is some overlap. You may wish to take both in order to optimize
digestion of both fiber and other carbohydrates, and proteins and fats. If you decide to do so, start
with half a dose of each (rather than a full dose of both) and discuss the benefits of increasing to a full
dose of each with your health care provider.
      Make sure to read the labels of digestive-enzyme supplements carefully. Dairy and rice are
common ingredients in inexpensive brands. Choose one that is labeled gluten-, wheat-, soy-, dairy-,
corn-, yeast-, and egg-free. Also, the enzymatic activity varies, so a higher-quality brand of this
supplement is worth the extra money.
      How will you know when it’s time to decrease your dose of digestive-enzyme supplements? If
your stool quality has improved, you may opt to lower your dose and observe whether your stool
quality reverts, you experience an increase in gastrointestinal symptoms, or you experience an
increase in any symptoms of your autoimmune disease. If you like how you feel on these supplements,
by all means keep taking them. Watch for gastrointestinal distress developing over time, which may
indicate that your pancreas is secreting more digestive enzymes and your need for supplementation is
decreasing.

Is It Helping?

When you first start taking digestive-support supplements, you can expect to have a gastrointestinal
reaction (similar to the one during your initial transition to the Paleo Approach; see here) owing to
changes in your gut microflora. This is because once you start better digesting what you eat, there will
be less left over to feed overgrowths. These symptoms (most commonly increased stool frequency,
but sometimes diarrhea or constipation, though the latter is less likely) should be fairly mild and last
no more than about two weeks.
     When you use digestive-support supplements appropriately, your digestion should improve
fairly rapidly, your stool quality improving within about two weeks. For most people, as gut
microflora adjusts and micronutrients are absorbed more efficiently, the healing process will speed
up.
      If adding digestive-support supplements does not make an appreciable difference in your
symptoms, there are other potential culprits. Talk to your health care provider about whether you
should continue taking the supplements while you explore other avenues.
The Need for Probiotics

If you don’t tolerate (or like) fermented foods, you may want to take a probiotic supplement. But there
are so many options; how to know which are the best for you? As mentioned in chapter 5, different
strains of probiotics have different benefits, but of the approximately 35,000 species of probiotic
bacteria, only a handful have been characterized.
      As previously mentioned, probiotics have proved beneficial for the management of every
autoimmune disease in which they were tested, including inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune
myasthenia gravis, celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and autoimmune thyroid
disease. However, there is also some conflicting data. In fact, there is convincing evidence that both
Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus probiotic bacteria (the two most common bacterial genera in
probiotic supplements) are a source of autoantibody formation through molecular mimicry in
autoimmune thyroid disease (discussed in chapter 1). Furthermore, there have been reports of severe
eosinophilic syndrome—a condition characterized by elevated eosinophils (a type of white blood
cell essential to the innate immune system; see here) in the blood with damage to the cardiovascular
system, nervous system, or bone marrow—directly attributable to the use of probiotics (both in
people with a history of autoimmune disease and in completely healthy individuals).
      What does this mean? If you do not tolerate fermented foods, probiotic supplements are
definitely worth trying. The majority of the evidence in the scientific literature supports their potential
benefits; however, some caution is advised. Just as in the case of fermented foods, probiotic
supplements can be added after complying with the Paleo Approach for at least three weeks in the
case of people with severe gastrointestinal symptoms or known bacterial overgrowth.
      Which ones should you take? Probiotic supplements fall into two categories:

Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium.

Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium are the two most studied genera of probiotic bacteria.
      If you take one of these, choose a brand with as many different strains as possible (for greater
probiotic diversity), but be aware that dairy is a common ingredient in these types of supplements.
Look for one that is dairy-, gluten-, soy-, corn-, wheat-, egg-, peanut-, and tree nut-free. Also look for
one that is yeast-free if you are taking a probiotic supplement instead of eating fermented foods
because of a yeast sensitivity.
      The prescription-strength VSL#3, which contains Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains,
has been shown to improve gut-barrier function by increasing tight-junction regulation and reducing
inflammation. It has been successfully used in clinical trials for several gut pathologies, including
ulcerative colitis.
      With any probiotic, start with a low dose, even breaking open a capsule and sprinkling a small
amount in your food or in a small cup of water. Alternatively, you can take your probiotic supplement
every two or three days. Over the course of several weeks, work your way up to the suggested daily
dose. Some probiotic supplements should be taken with food, others on an empty stomach—follow
the specific recommendation of the brand you are using. If your supplement doesn’t have directions
regarding whether or not to take it with food, first try taking it with food. After several weeks, switch
to taking it on an empty stomach and see if you notice any improvement.
Soil-Based Organisms. While                   not as extensively studied as Lactobacillus and
Bifidobacterium probiotics, soil-based organisms hold extreme promise for modulating the immune
system and correcting gut dysbiosis. They have been shown to have extreme therapeutic potential for
IBS and provide probiotic organisms that are routinely lacking today due to our society’s obsession
with hygiene, yet are normal residents of a healthy gut.
      Make sure that the brand you buy does not contain the potentially pathogenic strains Bacillus
licheniformis, Bacillus cereus, or Bacillus anthracis. (Most, if not all, manufacturers of soil-based-
organism supplements have removed these strains from their formulas.)
      The Prescript-Assist brand contains twenty-nine strains of soil-based organisms; it is also dairy-
, gluten-, soy-, corn-, wheat-, egg-, peanut-, tree nut-, and yeast-free (and none of its strains come
from the Lactobacillus or Bifidobacterium genera or are those typically found in fermented foods).
Prescript-Assist has one of the best diversities of any probiotic supplement available and has been
vetted in clinical trials (at least for IBS). Soil-based organisms seem to be better tolerated than
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, although extensive comparisons have not been made.
      Two capsules daily (divided into two doses with food) for thirty days, followed by one capsule
once or twice a week as a maintenance dose, is the typical recommendation. Because the strains in
soil-based-organism probiotics are different from those in fermented foods, it is worth thinking about
taking a soil-based probiotic even if you are eating fermented foods or taking a Lactobacillus and
Bifidobacterium-based probiotic.




     D-Lactic Acid Production in Bacterial Overgrowth
A study evaluating the gut microbiota of people suffering from chronic fatigue syndrome found that
they had overgrowth of bacteria (Enterococcus and Streptococcus) that produce D-lactic acid as a
result of their metabolism of the sugars in the small intestine. This lactic acid can cause increased
intestinal permeability. In addition, excessive production of D-lactic acid causes a condition known
as D-lactic acidosis (typically in people with short-bowel syndrome as a result of bowel resections),
the symptoms of which are mild to severe cognitive dysfunction with varying neurological
impairments, including dysarthria (difficulty articulating), ataxia (lack of muscle coordination,
sometimes presenting as lack of balance), weakness, confusion, and inability to concentrate. The
study authors hypothesized that D-lactic acid formation could account, at least in part, for the
symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome. Importantly, lactobacilli are also D-lactic acid–producing
bacteria. Although no other studies have evaluated whether D-lactic acid production contributes to
autoimmune diseases in general, this is certainly a reason to be cautious with lactobacilli-based
supplements and to discontinue using them should you experience any of the symptoms mentioned
above. Lactobacilli-based probiotics are definitely contraindicated in patients with SIBO and a
concurrent risk of D-lactic acidosis (especially if you have a diagnosis of short-bowel syndrome,
have had a bowel resection, or had a jejunoileal bypass before that surgery was discontinued in the
1970s). Also note that this contraindication applies to lactofermented vegetables and fruits.
Severe Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth

Sometimes combining conventional medicine and natural approaches, like those recommended in this
book, is far more powerful than either would be in isolation. Severe small intestinal bowel
overgrowth is a good example. Recall that SIBO is a form of gut dysbiosis in which there are more
microorganisms than normal in the small intestine (see here). The excess may be of bacteria or yeast
normally present in the small intestine or other species of bacteria or yeast, like those normally
present in the colon (most common) or the mouth. Typically one to three species dominate
overgrowths, some of the common culprits being Streptococci, E. coli, Staphylococci, Micrococci,
Klebsiella, and Candida.
     SIBO may manifest in a variety of ways, perhaps reflecting that the details (exact species that
are overgrowing, exact numbers of microorganisms, and exact locations of overgrowth) can vary
enormously from person to person. SIBO may be completely asymptomatic or may be associated with
a variety of gastrointestinal symptoms (bloating, flatulence, abdominal discomfort, diarrhea,
constipation, abdominal pain). When severe, SIBO may be associated with:


     signs of malabsorption (unexplained weight loss, malnutrition, or steatorrhea—i.e., fatty stools)
     liver lesions
     skin symptoms (rosacea, acne, eczema, rashes, etc.)
     joint pain
     nutrient-deficiency syndromes (anemia typically from vitamin B12 deficiency; tetany, or
     involuntary muscle contractions induced by hypocalcemia resulting from vitamin D deficiency;
     metabolic bone disease; polyneuropathy from vitamin B12 deficiency; impaired gut-barrier
     function; etc.)


      And, of course, SIBO is strongly associated with IBS and a variety of autoimmune conditions.
      Mild and moderate cases of SIBO are likely to respond very well to the Paleo Approach, thanks
to the reduction in total carbohydrates, the reduction in digestion-resistant foods, the increase in
prebiotic fibers from vegetables and fruit, the increase in omega-3 fatty acids, and the inclusion of
probiotic foods or supplements. The use of digestive-support supplements can also significantly
improve SIBO, especially in conjunction with these positive dietary changes (see here). Recall that
SIBO can also be caused by FODMAP intolerance s(ee here), so if you are experiencing persistent
SIBO after adopting the Paleo Approach, removing FODMAP-containing foods from your diet is
definitely indicated. Sometimes a little patience is required, as resolving SIBO with diet and lifestyle
changes alone can be a protracted process. However, if you have a severe case of SIBO that is not
responding quickly to diet and lifestyle changes, you may want to throw some conventional medicine
into the mix.
      Before you do so, though, you should obtain a positive diagnosis. There are two common
methods for diagnosing SIBO. The first, which is considered the gold standard, involves aspirating
(sucking up) a sample of the chyme inside the jejunum (the middle segment of the small intestine) via
enteroscopy (a camera and a special syringe on a long tube guided into your intestine through your
mouth, typically while you are sedated), which is then cultured and evaluated for numbers of bacteria
and bacterial strains. This diagnostic method has some limitations, namely false negatives, which may
occur because the bacterial strains in the sample are resistant to being cultured in laboratory
conditions. Alternatively, false negatives may be due to the sampling missing the overgrowth.
      The second diagnostic test for SIBO involves measuring the amount of hydrogen or methane in
your breath (hydrogen being the more common and considered the more accurate). Hydrogen and
methane breath tests may also be combined with a D-xylose breath test, which improves accuracy.
Breath tests are obviously much less invasive than taking aspirates from the jejunum and are thus far
more routinely performed. The hydrogen (or methane) breath test is done after you drink a disgusting
sugar drink containing either glucose or lactulose. If a D-xylose breath test is also being performed,
radiolabeled 14C-D-xylose or 13C-D-xylose is added to, or used instead of, glucose or lactulose.
(Radiolabeling is achieved by substituting one carbon atom in a molecule with a radioactive carbon
atom, 13C or 14C, which emits a characteristic wavelength of light called a gamma ray that is easily
measured using special equipment. Both 13C and 14C are naturally occurring molecules that we are
exposed to every day, and the amount used in the test is very low.) Neither hydrogen nor methane is
produced by our cells, but rather only by intestinal bacteria. In healthy people, hydrogen- and
methane-producing bacteria live almost exclusively in the large intestine, so 80 percent of the gas that
is produced is expelled by flatus. When these bacteria live higher up in the digestive tract, a larger
and larger percentage can be measured in the breath as they metabolize sugars. (Exactly how much
hydrogen or methane is produced varies both by how many bacteria there are and how high up they
are, which cannot be differentiated with this test.) D-xylose, which is only partly absorbed by your
body, is metabolized specifically by anaerobic bacteria in the gut (hence the increased specificity of
this test). This metabolism of D-xylose also produces hydrogen gas and releases the radiolabeled
carbon, which is subsequently absorbed in the body and can be measured once incorporated into
exhaled carbon dioxide. Breath tests can also produce false negatives. False negatives are caused if
the bacteria overgrowth is predominantly aerobic bacteria rather than anaerobic bacteria. Other
causes of false negatives include unusually rapid absorption of glucose higher up the gastrointestinal
tract and bacterial overgrowth being present fairly far down the digestive tract, such as in the distal
ileum. Other factors, such as delayed gastric emptying, can cause false negatives (and rapid intestinal
emptying can cause false positives).
      Conventional medical treatment of SIBO involves a course of nonabsorbable antibiotics and/or
antifungals. While several are known to be effective, the best studied (and probably most effective) is
a drug called rifaximin (brand name Xifaxan). Rifaximin has even been shown to induce remission of
moderate Crohn’s disease. Other options include vancomycin, neomycin, tetracycline, metronidazole,
levofloxacin, and fluconazole, or various combinations of these drugs. Sometimes probiotics or
prebiotics are added to treatment, and clinical trials typically show better outcomes as a result. It is
common for people to experience huge improvement while being treated, lasting for some time
afterward, but when the root causes of SIBO (such as poor diet and chronic stress) are not addressed,
recurrence is likely.




     Other Uses for Breath Tests
The breath tests used to diagnose SIBO are also used to diagnose other related conditions. Hydrogen
breath tests can be used to diagnose FODMAP intolerance (see here) and other carbohydrate-
malabsorption conditions, such as lactose intolerance (with an easy switch of the type of sugar in the
challenge solution). D-xylose breath tests can be used to diagnose celiac disease and intestinal
malabsorption.



      Alternative health care practitioners may achieve the same goal using a variety of medicinal or
botanical antimicrobials, including monolaurin, cat’s claw, wormwood, goldenseal (caution:
goldenseal stimulates Th1 cell activation and may exacerbate some autoimmune diseases), pau
d’arco, olive leaf extract, garlic, barberry, Oregon grape, and oregano oil. Even extra-virgin coconut
oil may be taken as an antimicrobial to treat SIBO. Biofilm disruptors, such as lactoferrin and N-
acetylcysteine, may improve the efficacy of the antimicrobials. These treatments are also much more
effective when combined with positive dietary changes.
      A relatively new treatment being used with some success for gut dysbiosis, Clostridium difficile
infection, colitis, chronic constipation, and IBS is fecal microbiota transplant. The procedure is pretty
straightforward: fecal matter from a healthy donor is introduced into the large intestine via enema or
colonoscopy. A greater and greater number of doctors are performing this procedure for an increasing
range of health conditions. For some people with autoimmune disease, this may be a very good option
to investigate.
Persistent Infections and Parasites

Other pathogens may have taken up residence in your gastrointestinal tract (or elsewhere in your
body) and may be hindering your ability to heal, among them bacterial infections such as
Helicobacter pylori, Clostridium difficile, and Borrelia burgdorferi, but also parasite infections
such as Giardia lamblia, Schistosoma, and helminth worms (see here).
      In some cases, restoring immune system function by adopting the Paleo Approach will provide
enough ammo to deal with persistent infections without medical intervention. But sometimes
persistent infections, which may be important triggers of autoimmune disease, do require
conventional medicine. You can undergo treatment while simultaneously adopting the diet and
lifestyle changes recommended in this book.
      A variety of tests on both blood and stool samples are used to assess persistent bacterial
infections. There are other tests for specific infections, such as the carbon urea breath test for
Helicobacter pylori (similar to the D-xylose test, but you drink radiolabeled urea, which the
bacterium metabolizes). Evaluation of biopsy samples and medical imaging (like MRI scans) might
also be performed. A variety of diagnostic tests are available to evaluate parasite infections,
including a fecal exam (also known as an ova and parasite test), endoscopy, colonoscopy, blood tests,
and medical imaging (like CT scans). For both persistent bacterial infections and parasite infections,
diagnosis can be challenging because of limitations in diagnostic techniques.
      Many of the same antimicrobial drugs, medicinals, and botanicals used to treat SIBO can be
used to treat persistent bacterial infections, although combination therapies and multiple courses of
antimicrobial or antiparasitic drugs are more commonly required. The drugs used to treat parasite
infections include tinidazole, thiabendazole, albendazole, mebendazole, diethylcarbamazine,
ivermectin, and praziquantel. Because these infections can be very difficult to treat, it is important to
be reevaluated after treatment (even if symptoms improve) to verify eradication.
      Treatment for persistent infections or parasites can be accompanied by some fairly intense side
effects. (Side effects vary depending on the parasite or infection and the drugs being used but can
include a variety of gastrointestinal, neurological, skin, and allergy symptoms.) It will be even more
important to manage stress, get plenty of sleep, and follow the dietary guidelines in The Paleo
Approach very strictly to help heal the gut and restore normal gut microflora after treatment.
The Gut-Brain Axis

The brain and digestive system communicate with each other by means of a complex system. We’ve
already discussed the hormonal component of this link in great detail (cortisol, see here; melatonin,
see here; and hunger hormones, see here) and even the chemical and immunological component of this
link (cytokines produced by immune cells in the gut also send signals to the brain). However, there is
also communication via the nervous system, specifically the enteric nervous system. This
communication is why just thinking about food causes stomach acid and digestive enzymes to be
released, or why insulin is released in anticipation of high blood-sugar levels (see here). If you’re
nervous or stressed, your stomach may feel upset and your appetite may be suppressed. Very
importantly, this neural communication goes both ways—the gut also sends signals to the brain. This
multifaceted communication between the digestive system and the brain (including neural signals,
hormonal signals, and chemical or immunological signals) is called the gut-brain connection or the
gut-brain axis, and problems in this link may prevent healing.
      Embedded in its walls, an extensive network of neurons lines the entire gut—the esophagus,
stomach, intestines, colon, and rectum. This is called the enteric nervous system, and it consists of
more neurons than are in either the spinal cord or the peripheral nervous system. This neural network
is so extensive that it is called the “second brain.” The enteric nervous system is responsible for
regulating all aspects of digestion, from breaking down food to absorbing nutrients to expelling
waste.




Want more information?
Check out The Second Brain: A Groundbreaking New Understanding of Nervous Disorders of
the Stomach and Intestine, by Michael Gershon.
     Your brain sends signals to all the nerves in your body. These signals are essential for every
action, from breathing to moving your legs so you can walk. A very large portion of your brain’s
output is directed into the vagus nerve, which innervates (i.e., branches into the nerves controlling)
most of the thoracic and abdominal cavities, including the digestive tract. The vagus nerve thus
controls a wide range of functions, from your heart beating to the secretion of digestive enzymes to the
peristalsis of your digestive tract.
     Stress, anxiety, depression, and strong negative emotions decrease brain activity, which
decreases activation of the vagus nerve. This has a dramatic impact on digestion, including reducing
stomach-acid production (see here), reducing pancreatic-enzyme secretion, causing poor gallbladder
function, decreasing gut motility (see here), decreasing intestinal blood flow (see here), and
suppressing the intestinal immune system. This is why you shouldn’t eat when you’re upset. When
reduced vagus-nerve activation is persistent, as might happen during periods of chronic stress or
clinical depression, the slowing down of so many digestive functions can lead to SIBO (see here),
which leads to a leaky gut and chronic inflammation. This is in addition to the effects of cortisol
dysregulation (see here). And it’s why people who are depressed so often also suffer from
constipation or IBS.
     Eighty percent of the fibers in the vagus nerve carry information from the gut to the brain, and not
the other way around. This means that the gut (and even the gut microflora) communicates directly
with the brain, perhaps having a direct impact on emotions and moods. In fact, many of the beneficial
effects of the probiotic bacteria in the gut are dependent on vagal activation affecting brain function.
(Of course, there are many other mechanisms through which probiotic bacteria benefit health; see
here.) The gut also utilizes chemical signaling to communicate directly with the brain. A variety of
metabolites produced by probiotic bacteria in the gut are neuroactive, meaning that they affect
neurons. These include short-chain fatty acids (see here), a variety of neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators (such as GABA, noradrenalin, serotonin, dopamine, and acetylcholine—yes, all can
be produced by gut bacteria), and cytokines.




     The Gut-Brain Axis
Skin-related autoimmune conditions are some of the most challenging to mitigate with diet alone. This
is because the skin is just as connected to the gut and to the brain as these organs are to each other.
     Scientists are beginning to define an even broader axis, called the gut-brain-skin axis, which
recognizes the communication between these three organs. The idea of a gut-brain-skin axis originates
from observations that mood disorders (such as depression), gastrointestinal symptoms (such as
constipation), and skin symptoms (such as severe acne and atopic eczema) very frequently occur
simultaneously. There is a well-understood link between gut dysbiosis and many skin conditions,
most of the mechanisms of which have already been discussed (albeit in more general terms). Skin
conditions may manifest from an increase of toxins entering the body via a leaky gut (endotoxin in
particular; see here), increased inflammation, increased oxidative stress, immune activation, and
decreased insulin sensitivity caused by endotoxin exposure. There is also a clear link between skin
conditions and the brain, since their presence generally causes psychological distress in the sufferer.




      For those with autoimmune diseases affecting the skin, managing stress and prioritizing sleep are
critical. Protecting the barrier function of the skin and protecting the microbiota that normally reside
on skin can also be useful: don’t use harsh cleansers and soaps or any other chemicals that may
irritate the skin, and don’t take overly long or hot showers or baths. Additionally, using naturally
vitamin-rich and antioxidant-rich fats, such as emu oil, tamanu oil, grass-fed tallow, olive oil, jojoba
oil, fermented cod liver oil, and coconut oil (and various combinations of these fats) as moisturizers
can help restore the barrier function of the skin. Topical probiotics (cleansers, moisturizers, body
mists, and medicated ointments) have been shown to be beneficial for some skin conditions in some
clinical trials. Sun exposure, mineral-salts baths (especially using Dead Sea salts), and collagen
supplementation are often extremely helpful in resolving skin conditions as well.



     The proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory signals sent by cytokines have been discussed at
length already, but it’s important to understand that these are not just signals from one immune cell to
another: cytokines, when produced in substantial quantities, travel throughout the body (via the blood)
and transmit their message to virtually every cell, including cells in the brain. This is how
inflammation that originates in the gut (or anywhere else in the body) can become generalized and
systemic—that is, bodywide. When proinflammatory cytokines are produced in substantial quantities,
as occurs in anyone with a leaky gut and especially those with autoimmune disease, they enter the
bloodstream and travel to the brain. These cytokines cross the blood-brain barrier and activate the
resident macrophages of the brain, the microglia cells. Thus inflammation that starts in the gut can
cause inflammation in the brain. As inflammatory signals from the gut persist, the inflammation in the
brain increases. And an inflamed brain has less (and slower) nerve conduction, which manifests as
stress, depression, or anxiety—which is why depression and mood-related symptoms are so often
associated with autoimmune disease.
      This communication between the brain and gut is clearly related to the discussion of chronic
stress in chapter 3. However, what makes the gut-brain axis worthy of discussion now is that once
microglia cells are activated in the brain, it may be very difficult to deactivate them—meaning that
inflammation in the brain may be hard to turn off. And inflammation in the brain will obstruct healing
of the gut because of decreased vagus-nerve activation. It is, indeed, a vicious cycle.




     Does the Brain Also Communicate with the Immune System?
Recent studies have established that the brain also communicates directly with the immune system and
vice versa—also via the vagus nerve. Under normal (healthy, uninjured) conditions, vagus-nerve
activation sends signals to the spleen that stimulate a subset of memory T cells residing in the spleen
to release a neurochemical called acetylcholine. Acetylcholine then signals to other immune cells not
to produce proinflammatory cytokines. But when you get injured or have an infection, the nervous
system is activated (by binding neuron receptors with cytokines, prostaglandins, and even pathogens
themselves), and the signals not to produce proinflammatory cytokines get turned off. This is an early
warning system, a way for the peripheral nerves to alert the brain to a developing threat long before it
becomes severe enough to produce levels of inflammatory mediators (like cytokines) in sufficient
quantities to enter the bloodstream and communicate with the brain chemically. When the brain
receives the neural signals that injury or infection has occurred, it activates the HPA axis (which
provides endocrine, or hormonal, communication to the immune system; see here). Also, the output of
the vagus nerve decreases. The resulting change in signal to the spleen stops the built-in inhibition of
inflammatory signals; instead, the spleen releases large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines into the
bloodstream. The proinflammatory cytokines signal the release of immune cells into the blood from
the bone marrow, thymus gland, and spleen in search of an invader to neutralize or an injury to heal.
      Studies evaluating direct stimulation of the vagus nerve (through surgical implantation of an
electrotherapeutic device) or manipulation of the acetylcholine system show that they can be used to
control inflammation, which may prove useful for those with autoimmune disease. However, this truly
underscores the importance of stress management in healing from autoimmune disease.




     Supplements for Stress
When battling stress, magnesium may be an extremely beneficial supplement because it is an
important mineral for neural function and it is depleted during periods of stress, especially the
inflammatory stress that occurs in autoimmune disease. In fact, magnesium deficiency may enhance
inflammatory or oxidative stress induced by other factors, including chronic stress and sleep
deprivation. Magnesium supplementation decreases the amount of cortisol released due to exhaustive
exercise. It also improves sleep and acts as a mood stabilizer, even reversing depression by restoring
serotonin levels.
     When choosing a magnesium supplement, magnesium glycinate and magnesium taurinate have
been shown to be effective in addressing magnesium deficiencies and reversing depression.
Magnesium absorption is enhanced with the consumption of prebiotic fibers (see here) and vitamin
B6.
     Because the calming effect of magnesium is very conducive to sleep, it’s common for magnesium
to be taken in the evening before bed. But taking it in a divided dose with meals probably increases
absorption. You can also do both (which has actually been shown to be effective for depression in
clinical trials)—take it with meals and before bed.
     Note that magnesium supplements are incompletely absorbed and that magnesium can increase
the water content of your stools (see here). If you get diarrhea from magnesium, try decreasing your
dose, switching the form in which you take your magnesium (say, trying magnesium glycinate if
you’ve been taking magnesium taurinate), and changing the timing in relation to meals.



      Vitamin C may also be very helpful for those struggling with cortisol dysregulation. Vitamin C is
actually secreted by the adrenal glands in response to adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH;see
here) in advance of cortisol secretion. While it remains unknown exactly why the adrenal glands do
this, in the case of chronic stress it can deplete the body’s stores of vitamin C. This means that if
you’re stressed, you need way more vitamin C. Note that high-dose vitamin C supplementation (five
hundred to one thousand milligrams three times a day) has been shown to blunt the cortisol response
to acute psychological stress or strenuous exercise. The benefits that increased dietary omega-3 fatty
acids have on cortisol regulation have already been mentioned (see here).
      A variety of other supplements are available—often labeled adrenal-support supplements,
adaptogenic supplements, herbal stress remedies, or even herbal sleep aids—many of which have
been traditionally used to counter stress for centuries, and some of which have been validated in the
scientific literature. While some of these supplements may be helpful complements to your stress-
management efforts, many of them contain ingredients that are also immune stimulators. Therefore,
extreme caution should be used with them in the case of autoimmune disease.
      For example, many herbal adrenal-support supplements contain oat seed or oat seed extract
(typically listed by the Latin name Avena sativa on the label), which contains the prolamin avenin and
may even contain gluten (see here). Lemon balm (typically listed by its Latin name, Melissa
officinalis) negatively impacts both the innate and the adaptive immune system and also suppresses
thyroid function.
      Adaptogenic herbs, or adaptogens, are herbs or isolated chemicals (typically polyphenols; see
here) that increase the body’s resistance to stress, trauma, anxiety, and fatigue. Another extremely
common ingredient in adrenal-support supplements is ashwagandha, which is a member of the
nightshade family and may stimulate the immune system in some people. Ginseng, which is often
added to antistress formulas to boost energy, appears to have immune-stimulating properties; clearly,
stimulating an already overstimulated immune system is not productive. The adaptogenic herbs
Astragalus membranaceus, Schisandra chinensis, and Cordyceps sinensis all stimulate the immune
system.
      Neurotransmitter-support supplements are also often recommended for those dealing with
chronic stress. GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter known to play a
role in the HPA axis at the level of both the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. GABA, available in
supplement form, is purported to reduce stress, but its efficacy has not been documented in scientific
studies. DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) is a neuroactive steroid and an intermediate in the
production of androgens and estrogen (the production of these hormones is a step-by-step process,
and DHEA is one of the steps), normally produced in both the adrenal glands and the brain. DHEA
supplementation has been shown to lower cortisol and improve memory. However, DHEA is
immunomodulatory, and lowering cortisol is not always a good thing (you want your cortisol to be
regulated rather than simply lowered). DHEA has been shown to increase the number and activity of
natural killer cells (see here), decrease some proinflammatory cytokines, but also increase cytokine
secretion from Th1 cells and stimulate T-cell proliferation. Results of DHEA supplementation in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus have been inconclusive. There are also concerns about the
long-term safety of DHEA supplementation.
      Another option is a low dose of the medication naltrexone, which suppresses activation of
microglia cells (discussed in more detail on see here).
      While the temptation is to “fix” stress with supplements, this approach isn’t likely to work for
those with autoimmune disease. And while high intake of omega-3 fatty acids plus supplementation
with magnesium and vitamin C may be beneficial, it is not a substitute for lifestyle adjustments to
decrease the stressors in your life and improve your innate resilience. If you are struggling with a gut-
brain-axis problem, supplements should be considered auxiliary to the strategies outlined in chapter
6.
      All the strategies discussed in chapter 6 are even more important if you are dealing with a gut-
brain-axis problem—especially managing stress and prioritizing sleep. If you aren’t already
practicing mindful meditation, it can be extremely helpful. Increasing blood flow to the brain through
moderately intense exercise or by making time for intellectually challenging activities speeds up the
resolution of inflammation in the brain. Sleep is extremely important for resolving inflammation (not
just in the brain but in the whole body) and for managing stress. Consuming probiotic foods or taking
probiotic supplements can help alter the message sent by the gut to the brain. Increasing intake of
omega-3 fatty acids (specifically DHA and EPA) supports normal neurotransmitter production and
function and helps normalize gut microbiota.
      There are also some supplements—S-acetyl glutathione, ginkgo, L-acetyl carnitine, and
huperzine—that may reduce inflammation in the brain, although they should be used only under the
supervision of a health care professional. A short-term ketogenic diet might be beneficial for some
(see here). Chamomile or other herbal teas may invoke a sense of relaxation.
Allergies, Intolerances, and Sensitivities




Another obstacle to healing is continuing to eat foods (or be environmentally exposed to substances)
to which you have developed an allergy, intolerance, or sensitivity. Figuring out which foods (or
substances, like chemicals) might be an issue for you can be a bit tricky, so I’m going to talk about the
most common culprits.
     An allergy is an immune reaction in which IgE antibodies (see here) are produced against a food
or a specific substance in your environment (like pollen). This triggers histamine release from mast
cells and basophils (see here), which causes the symptoms normally associated with allergies,
including hives, rashes, swelling (lips, eyes, ears, face, tongue, throat), flushing or burning sensation
in skin, abdominal pain, bloating, vomiting, diarrhea, ear pain, sneezing, coughing,
bronchoconstriction, wheezing, feeling breathless, red or itchy eyes, swelling of nasal tissues, runny
nose, and increased heart rate. These symptoms may be dramatic (as in the case of anaphylaxis) or
subtle (as in the case of mild seasonal allergies).
     You may have noticed that most of the common food allergens are eliminated on the Paleo
Approach. But a few remain, and undiagnosed food allergies may be impeding your healing. The
common allergy foods that are still included are:


     Fish. One of the top eight food allergies that accounts for more than 90 percent of all food
     allergies; also mandated by the FDA to be included on all food labels if possibility of
     contamination is present (see here).
     Shellfish. One of the top eight food allergies that accounts for more than 90 percent of all food
     allergies; also mandated by the FDA to be included on all food labels if possibility of
     contamination is present (see here).
     Latex-Allergy Foods. Due to high likelihood of antibody cross-reactivity, latex allergies go
     hand-in-hand with allergies to cassava, banana, avocado, kiwi, apple, carrot, celery, papaya,
     and melon (and to a lesser extent pear, mango, peach, plum, shellfish, cherry, pineapple, citrus
     fruits, strawberry, coconut, fig, grape, apricot, dill, lychee, passionfruit, oregano, zucchini,
     nectarine, sage, and persimmon).
     Birch-Pollen-Allergy Fruits and Vegetables. Due to high likelihood of antibody cross-
     reactivity, birch-pollen allergies go hand-in-hand with allergies to celery, apple, peach, carrot,
     pear, plum, and cherry.
     Ragweed-Pollen-Allergy Fruits and Vegetables. Due to high likelihood of antibody cross-
     reactivity, ragweed-pollen allergies go hand-in-hand with allergies to banana and melon.
     Mugwort-Pollen-Allergy Fruits and Vegetables. Due to high likelihood of antibody cross-
     reactivity, mugwort-pollen allergies go hand-in-hand with allergies to celery, apple, carrot,
     kiwi, and parsley.
     Poison Ivy Family. Due to the allergen urushiol’s presence in all members of this family, poison
     ivy allergies often go hand-in-hand with allergies to mango (see here).
     Citrus (see here)
     Yeast. Allergies to yeast require avoiding all foods that contain yeast, including all fermented
     foods, wine, cider, vinegars, some fruit (especially grapes and plums), Marmite, Vegemite,
     processed meat and fish, many canned foods, B vitamins (unless explicitly labeled), many dried
     fruits, and some supplements.
     Beef
     Garlic
     Kiwi




     The Time Frame for Food Intolerances to Go Away
Waiting at least six months to reintroduce a food that you are intolerant to is not arbitrary. For a food
intolerance to disappear, your body has to stop making antibodies against proteins in that food, and
the antibodies that were already made must be cleared. (Clearance, or elimination, of antibodies is a
complex process.) Fortunately, antibodies and B cells don’t live forever. Plasma B cells can live for
up to a few months but often only for a few days (a bunch of factors determine exactly how long a
particular B cell will last). Antibodies have a half-life (the amount of time for the body to clear half
of the antibodies present) ranging from two to twenty-three days. (IgG antibodies, which are the most
common culprits behind food intolerance, have the longest half-life.) So if your B cells are short-
lived, it takes about six months for 99 percent of the antibodies to be cleared from your system
(assuming long-lived antibodies). A lot of variables affect just how long it takes for a food
intolerance to go away, so you might need to be patient.



      Food-allergy testing can be done by blood test or skin test. Blood tests are fairly
straightforward; the most common test, called a RAST test, measures the presence of IgE antibodies
in the blood against upward of 160 different foods. In skin tests, which are considered more accurate,
small amounts of allergens are placed on the skin of your arms or back in a grid pattern. The skin is
then pricked where the allergens are placed. (Alternatively, allergens can be injected just under the
skin.) After a specific amount of time, the skin is evaluated for severity of reaction (usually red or
puffy skin or hives).
      If you have a diagnosed or suspected allergy to any food, you should avoid that food completely.
Severe food allergies are not likely to disappear completely on the Paleo Approach, although the
severity of your reaction may diminish.
      You may have intolerances—that is, immune responses other than IgE reactions (typically IgG,
IgA, or IgM antibodies;see here)—for foods recommended on the Paleo Approach. When you have a
severely leaky gut, proteins from anything you eat can cross the gut barrier and interact with the
immune system. And the more damaged your gut barrier and the more activated your immune system,
the more likely you will develop food intolerances. While these foods don’t normally irritate the gut
or activate the immune system, because of your food intolerance they now exacerbate inflammation.
      You may be able to figure out which food(s) you are sensitive to by eliminating the suspect(s)
for two to three weeks and seeing if that makes a difference. This is simple if you consistently notice
symptoms when you eat a specific food. However, if there are multiple culprits, it may be a good idea
to ask your health care practitioner to order an IgG food sensitivity test (even better if it includes IgA
and IgM) and help you interpret the results. In the case of a severely leaky gut, many foods may test
positive, and your health care practitioner can help you determine which should be excluded from
your diet (those with the strongest reactions) and which you can continue to eat in moderation.
      Although the most common intolerances are for foods that are already excluded from the Paleo
Approach (dairy, eggs, legumes, cereal grains, and nuts), some others that occur with higher
frequency include:
      • apple
      • apple cider vinegar
      • beef
      • celery
      • chicken
      • fish
      • lamb
      Once you have eliminated all the foods you can’t tolerate from your diet, you should start to see
improvement. The good news is that you should be able to reintroduce these foods back into your diet
as early as six months later, once your gut has healed substantially and your immune system is better
regulated (although it’s safest to wait until your autoimmune disease is in full remission). Unlike food
allergies, food intolerances tend to be transient. This means that by removing those foods from your
diet for an extended period, along with restoring gut-barrier function, you’ll be able to eat most of
them in the future without problems.
      Food sensitivities are another possibility. Food sensitivities are distinct from allergies and
intolerances because they do not involve antibody production. Instead, sensitivities may arise through
a variety of other mechanisms, including from the effects of severe gut dysbiosis (production of
bacterial metabolites, for example, may be the cause of your sensitivity) or from an inability to
process or metabolize a substance (which can be a result of inflammation, damage to the gut, strain on
the liver, or damage to other tissues).




     A Case Against Mangoes
Mangoes are very high in total sugar, with more than half the sugar content being fructose: 100 grams
of mango, or slightly more than half a cup, contains 14.8 grams total sugar, 0.7 grams glucose, 2.9
grams fructose, and 9.9 grams sucrose. Besides their sugar load, mangoes are part of the poison ivy
family. The peel of the mango contains urushiol, the same oil in poison ivy and poison oak that is
responsible for the severe rash suffered by 85 percent of those who come in contact with these plants.
Even handling mangoes can be problematic for those with autoimmune diseases, especially
autoimmune skin conditions such as psoriasis.
      Cashews and pistachios are also members of the poison ivy family. For those attempting to
reintroduce nuts after their autoimmune disease goes into remission (following the guidelines in
chapter 9), extra caution should be used in the case of cashews and pistachios, especially for anyone
who has ever had a reaction to poison ivy or poison oak.



      Given a damaged or inflamed gut, food sensitivities may develop against any food and may be
difficult to diagnose. There are usually no specific tests; the only way to figure it out is through an
elimination diet. The following are the most common food sensitivities that might be hindering your
ability to heal:
      • FODMAP sensitivity (see here)
      • histamine intolerance
      • sulfite sensitivity
      • salicylate sensitivity
      • other sensitivities specific to your autoimmune disease (your health care provider should have
mentioned this if it applies to you)
      Any of these food sensitivities can make the healing process much more challenging and make
troubleshooting a protracted and frustrating process as well. As is the case with every potentially
confounding issue discussed in this chapter, working with a qualified health care professional to
pinpoint the problem can be extremely helpful.




     Cycling Foods and Eating Seasonally
When you have a severely leaky and inflamed or damaged gut, food intolerances and sensitivities are
likely to develop. Once you have identified and removed the offenders from your diet, healing should
accelerate. However, while your gut is healing, how can you avoid developing new intolerances or
sensitivities?
      The best strategy is what is known as food cycling or food rotating. This involves having set
periods of time (typically one to three weeks) when you eat only a subset of the foods on the Paleo
Approach. So, for the first time period, maybe your proteins are salmon, beef, chicken, and oysters. In
the next time period, your protein sources might be mackerel, trout, lamb, emu, and shrimp. During the
last time period in the cycle, your proteins might be halibut, mahi-mahi, pork, bison, and scallops.
Depending on the variety of foods you are used to eating, this can be a challenge to map out. It’s
usually helpful to make food lists that itemize which meats, seafoods, vegetables, and fruits will be
“allowed” during each period of the cycle.
      Another option is to eat seasonally. (This is mostly relevant to fruits and vegetables, so this
strategy may be combined with cycling of proteins.) What this means is that the only fruits and
vegetables you buy will be those that are in season, typically grown locally. Of course, this will vary
depending on the climate you live in. For example, strawberries and asparagus are usually harvested
in late spring, peaches and cherries in the summer, apples in the fall, and citrus fruits and cruciferous
veggies like kale and Brussels sprouts in the winter. An easy way to eat seasonally (and also eat the
best-quality produce) is to do the bulk of your shopping at local farms and farmers’ markets. This may
or may not be practical, depending on where you live, so you may need (or want) to supplement with
produce (in season, even if not grown nearby) from the grocery store. Fruits and vegetables also tend
to be cheaper when they are in season (since supply is high), which is great for anyone on a tight
budget.




Histamine Intolerance

Histamine intolerance results when there is more histamine in your body than your body can handle.
Histamine is a normal part of the diet (at least in small amounts) and also a normal product of the
bacteria in our guts. Histamine (which you will recognize as the key chemical produced by your body
during an allergic reaction; see here) is a type of molecule called a biogenic amine. In healthy people,
histamine and other biogenic amines are rapidly detoxified by gut enzymes. In the case of histamine
intolerance, however, either production of histamine is unusually high or activity of these
detoxification enzymes is unusually low (or both). Histamine intolerance may be more likely if you
have a thyroid condition or are taking thyroid hormone replacement drugs (especially if your dose of
thyroid hormone is too high).
When Is What in Season*?
Spring

    apricots
    artichokes
    arugula
    asparagus
    beets
    broccoli
    cauliflower
    chives
    collard greens
    fennel
    fiddleheads
    garlic
    grapefruit
    honeydew melon
    jicama
    kale
    kohlrabi
    limes
    mangoes
    mustard greens
    oranges
    pineapple
    radicchio
    ramps
    rhubarb
    sorrel
    spinach
    spring greens (baby lettuce)
    spring onions
    strawberries
    Swiss chard
    turnips
    Vidalia onions
    watercress




Fall
  apples
  arugula
  Asian pears
  bok choy
  broccoli
  Brussels sprouts
  cauliflower
  cherimoya
  coconuts
  cranberries
  daikon radish
  garlic
  ginger
  grapes
  guava
  huckleberries
  Jerusalem artichokes
  jicama
  kale
  kohlrabi
  kumquats
  passionfruit
  pears
  pomegranate
  pumpkin
  quince
  radicchio
  rutabagas
  sweet potatoes
  Swiss chard
  winter squash




Summer

  apricots
  arugula
  Asian pears
  beets
  black currants
  blackberries
  blueberries
  boysenberries
  broccoli
  cherries
  cucumber
  figs
  garlic
  grapes
  kiwi
  limes
  loganberries
  melons
  nectarines
  okra
  passionfruit
  peaches
  pineapples
  plums
  radishes
  raspberries
  strawberries
  summer squash
  Swiss chard
  zucchini




Winter

  apples
  bok choy
  Brussels sprouts
  cauliflower
  cherimoya
  clementines
  coconuts
  collard greens
  dates
  grapefruits
  jicama
  kale
  kiwi
      kohlrabi
      limes
      oranges
      passionfruit
      pears
      persimmons
      pineapple
      pomegranate
      pomelo
      red currants
      rutabagas
      sweet potatoes
      tangerines
      winter squash
      yams




Year-Round

      avocados
      bananas
      beet greens
      broccolini
      cabbage
      carrots
      celery
      celery root
      leeks
      lemons
      lettuce
      mushrooms
      onions
      papayas
      parsnips
      shallots
      turnips

*Based on North American harvests. Varies regionally.
Biogenic amines are created by removing the carboxyl group from an amino acid. In the case of
histamine, the amino acid that is “decarboxylated” is histidine.
      Histamine can be degraded by two different enzymes. Diamine oxidase (DAO) is secreted by
enterocytes and works outside the cells and even in the gut lumen to convert histamine into imidazole
acetaldehyde, thereby deactivating the histamine. DAO forms the primary barrier for intestinal
absorption of histamine. A second enzyme, found in enterocytes and called histamine N-
methyltransferase (HMT), converts histamine into N4-methylhistamine, also thereby deactivating the
histamine. While most studies implicate insufficient levels of DAO as the problem in histamine
intolerance, insufficient HMT may also be a contributor. Histamine intolerance may also be related to
certain genetic mutations in the gene for DAO that impair the efficiency of DAO activity. (These
mutations appear to be much more frequent in Caucasians than in other racial groups, although more
studies are necessary to confirm this.)
      If the gut barrier is damaged, DAO is not secreted in adequate quantities by the gut enterocytes.
Furthermore, a leaky gut can allow histamine to enter the body without passing through enterocytes,
where it would normally be degraded by HMT. Also, HMT deactivates histamine using a methylation
process, so micronutrient deficiencies may contribute to reduced HMT activity (see here). For
histamine to wreak havoc, it has to be absorbed and enter the bloodstream without being deactivated
by DAO or HMT, which seems likely in those with severely leaky guts.
      Furthermore, histamine production may be substantially higher in those with gut dysbiosis,
especially SIBO. Histamines in food are generally the result of food handling, processing, or
fermentation. Foods that are particularly susceptible to developing significant amounts of histamine
through processing or packaging include fish, processed and fermented meats, cheeses, fermented
vegetables, soy products, and alcoholic beverages. A wide variety of bacteria can metabolize
histidine into histamine. Called decarboxylase-positive microorganisms, they can typically produce
other biogenic amines as well. As a general rule, these bacteria are associated with food spoiling,
although they can generate problematic amounts of histamine long before a food is considered rotten.
Histamine-producing bacteria include many species from the following genera: Lactobacillus,
Clostridium, Morganella, Klebsiella, Hafiia, Proteus, Enterobacter, Vibrio, Acinetobacter,
Pseudomonas, Aeromonas, Plesiomonas, Staphylococcus, Pediococcus, Streptococcus, and
Micrococcus. Even E. coli are histamine-producing bacteria. You may recognize many of these as
normal residents of the gut (probably the reason we need a DAO barrier in the first place), and even
more important, several of these are likely to be excessively numerous during SIBO (see here). This
means that not only can these types of bacteria increase the histamine in your food before you eat it,
but they may also be creating large amounts of histamine in your gut.
      How do these bacteria get into food? Generally, they are ubiquitous in the environment. For
example, the vast majority of these bacteria are native to aquatic environments, so they are already
present on, and even in, fish before the fish are harvested. They are mostly inactive below 15°C, so
histamine production in fish is typically the result of fish not being handled properly (not being
chilled quickly enough after being removed from the water or not being kept at low-enough
temperatures during handling, processing, and packaging). (Most fish contain negligible histamine
fresh out of the ocean, lake, or river.) The bacteria do have some residual activity even at cold
temperatures, so histamine levels can also build up if fish is refrigerated for too long. Histamine
production in foods is considered a contaminant, or an indicator of food spoilage. It is actually a
source of food poisoning, especially when it comes to fish. In some cases, histamine-producing
bacteria are deliberately added to foods, as in the case of making cheese and fermented sausages, soy
products, and vegetables (although clearly the goal is not to produce histamines but rather to jump-
start the fermentation process).
      Some other factors contribute to histamine intolerance. If basophils and mast cells (the two
major cell types responsible for histamine release during immune and allergic reactions; see here) are
activated as part of your autoimmune disease or as a result of an undiagnosed food or environmental
allergy, your sensitivity to histamine from foods may increase simply because your basal level of
histamine production is higher. A variety of drugs inhibit the activity of DAO, including some
commonly prescribed muscle relaxants, narcotics, analgesics, local anesthetics, antihypertensives,
diuretics, antibiotics, H2 blockers (see here), and antidepressants. And not only does alcohol inhibit
DAO activity, but wine and beer contain a lot of histamine (especially red wine).




     Intolerance to Other Biogenic Amines?
Histamine is not the only biogenic amine that can be a problem, especially in high doses. The second
most toxic biogenic amine is tyramine, which is formed from the amino acid tyrosine by many of the
same bacteria (like Lactobacillus, Carnobacterium, and Micrococcaceae) that form histamine from
histidine. The same foods that are high in histamine also tend to be high in other biogenic amines, so
the good news is that there are no additional foods to avoid if you are sensitive to another biogenic
amine.
      In addition, the consumption of other biogenic amines can actually intensify a reaction to
histamine. This is because some other biogenic amines inhibit histamine metabolism, and some can
even increase histamine transport across the gut barrier.



      Symptoms of histamine intolerance resemble those of allergies and may include diarrhea,
headache, sinus symptoms (congestion, runny nose, postnasal drip, sinus pressure, sinus pain,
sneezing, problems with sense of smell), itchy or watery eyes, asthma, low blood pressure,
arrhythmia (rapid, slow, or irregular heart rate), hives, rashes, flushing, and others (see here).
Typically, a response is felt relatively quickly after consuming high-histamine foods. A food and
symptom journal is the most common way to diagnose histamine intolerance, but blood tests can
measure both histamine and DAO and may help confirm diagnosis (although there is some debate
over whether serum DAO is truly indicative of gut DAO). It is estimated that 1 percent of the
population has histamine intolerance, and most of these people are middle-aged. However, many
researchers believe that this is a gross underestimate because histamine intolerance has only very
recently been recognized as a pathology.
      The typical recommendation for those with histamine intolerance is to follow a histamine-free
diet. This can be challenging because the histamine content of foods (which depends on handling and
processing but also on the specific bacteria used in fermentation) varies significantly. Furthermore,
histamine content is not usually indicated on labels and is measured only to ensure food safety (since
high levels cause food poisoning). Antihistamines are recommended only when high amounts of
histamine are accidentally consumed, and not for long-term therapy. Although DAO supplements
(generally pig kidney enzymes) are available, clinical trials have not been performed to test their
efficacy. Also note that medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), the healthy fats in coconut and palm oil,
increase DAO activity and may be beneficial for those with histamine intolerance.
     Many of the foods that frequently contain large amounts of histamine are already excluded from
the Paleo Approach, including yogurt, sour cream, cheeses (Gouda, Camembert, Cheddar, Swiss,
Harzer, Tilsit, Parmesan), cured meats if they contain nightshade- or seed-based spices, alcoholic
beverages (white wine, red wine, champagne, sherry, beer), tomatoes, ketchup, eggplant, coffee,
chocolate, cocoa, and soy products (especially fermented soy products). Foods that are likely to
contain significant amounts of histamine but are allowed on the Paleo Approach:


     Alcoholic beverages



            white wine (even if alcohol is cooked off)
            red wine (even if alcohol is cooked off)
            champagne (even if alcohol is cooked off)
            sherry (even if alcohol is cooked off)




     Fermented, cured meats (if only “safe” spices are used; see here)



            dry-cured sausages
            fermented ham
            fermented sausages




     Fish



            anchovies
            bonito
            butterfly kingfish
            dried milkfish
            fish sauce
            fish paste (e.g., anchovy paste)
            herring
          mackerel
          marlin
          pilchard
          scad
          smooth-tailed trevally
          sardines (amount varies; some contain no histamine)
          saury
          shrimp paste
          tuna (amount varies; some contain no histamine)
          any fish if stored too long or handled improperly




     Fruit



          bananas
          grapes
          oranges
          pineapples
          strawberries
          tangerines




     Green tea
     Pork
     Sauerkraut (and potentially other lactofermented fruits and vegetables)
     Spinach


     Besides histamine content varying because of handling and processing, some foods are more
susceptible to histamine formation than others. Of the foods listed above, the average histamine
content ranges from two milligrams per kilogram to four thousand milligrams per kilogram, with
pineapples, strawberries, grapes, tangerines, and bananas at the low end of the scale and sausage,
herring, mackerel, pork, and spinach at the high end.
     It has also been suggested that there are foods with histamine-releasing capacities, meaning that
while they do not contain histamine, once they are ingested they can stimulate the release of histamine
from mast cells. Several of these foods are not allowed on the Paleo Approach, including egg whites,
chocolate, cocoa, tomatoes, nuts, a variety of food additives, and some spices (not defined, but
probably nightshades, given the high amount of histamine in sausages, salami, tomatoes, and
eggplant). However, some foods that are allowed on the Paleo Approach may also have histamine-
releasing capacities, including:
     citrus fruits
     crustaceans
     fish


      Because the exact contribution that gut bacteria (especially in the context of bacterial
overgrowth) make to the production of histamine in those with histamine intolerance is unknown (and
probably highly variable), it is also unknown to what degree foods that contain a lot of the amino acid
histidine should be avoided. If you have been diagnosed with histamine intolerance and have had
some (but incomplete) relief of symptoms by avoiding histamine-containing foods, eating smaller
portions of meat, fish, and shellfish (which are the highest dietary sources of histidine) may be worth
discussing with a health care professional. Certainly, following the recommendations already
detailed (at great length!) in this book to restore both normal gut flora and the integrity of the gut
barrier are important. Because histamine intolerance reflects both a damaged and leaky gut and gut
dysbiosis (except perhaps in the context of gene mutations), it is likely to diminish and eventually
disappear completely while following the Paleo Approach.




Sulfite Sensitivity

Sulfites are a group of chemicals (including sodium sulfite, sodium bisulfite, sodium metabisulfite,
potassium sulfite, potassium bisulfite, potassium metabisulfite, and sulfur dioxide) with a variety of
commercial uses. They are widely used in the food industry as preservatives and to prevent
discoloration or browning of foods throughout preparation, storage, and distribution. Sulfites are also
used extensively in the pharmaceutical industry and have a number of industrial uses.
      Sulfites have been used in winemaking for centuries. Because of their presumed safety, their use
in the food and beverage industry increased dramatically in the 1970s and 1980s. However, as more
and more cases of severe reactions to sulfites were documented, the FDA eventually prohibited their
use on fresh fruits and vegetables (used to keep the fruits and vegetables looking fresh). Sulfites
continue to be used routinely on fresh potatoes and some shrimp, in beer and wine, and in many
processed and prepackaged foods.
      Sulfites are implicated in asthma symptoms that may range from mild wheezing to potentially
life-threatening reactions. While breathing difficulties are the most common symptom, other possible
symptoms include dermatitis (eczema), hives, flushing, hypotension (low blood pressure), abdominal
pain, diarrhea, and anaphylaxis. While some people will react to sulfites when tested for allergies
(see here), sulfite-sensitivity reactions are generally not mediated through IgE antibody production. A
test called an oral metabisulfite challenge may be performed, in which lung function is monitored
while the patient is given increasing doses of metabisulfite. Elimination diets may also be used to
diagnose sulfite sensitivity.
      The precise mechanisms of sulfite sensitivity remain unknown. However, sulfites have been
shown to impact the immune system, which may be the cause of both asthmatic and allergylike
symptoms. In particular, when studied in cell-culture systems, sulfites suppress Th1-dependent
immune responses, including cytokine secretion by Th1 cells. Although this hasn’t been tested in
humans, it is believed to lead to exaggerated Th2-cell activation, which causes increased likelihood
of allergic and immune responses to allergens, thereby increasing susceptibility to immune diseases,
such as allergies, asthma, and eczema. Through this impact on the immune system, sulfite exposure
might also hinder healing from autoimmune disease.




       In most countries, sulfites must be labeled if they are added to a food as a preservative, but not
necessarily if they are used in food processing but not explicitly for food preservation. Most of the
foods that typically contain sulfites are already excluded from the Paleo Approach (such as
cornstarch, potato starch, tomato paste, and processed foods). However, some foods that may or may
not contain significant quantities of sulfites are allowed (or may be depending on the exact ingredients
list; sulfite content varies from manufacturer to manufacturer), including:


     alcoholic and nonalcoholic cider
     bottled lemon and lime juices and concentrates
     canned and frozen fruits and vegetables
     condiments (e.g., horseradish, pasteurized pickles, pasteurized sauerkraut)
     deli meats, hot dogs, and sausages (even if the spices are “safe”)
     dried fruits and vegetables (e.g., apricots, coconut, raisins, sweet potato)
     dried herbs, spices, and teas
     fish, crustaceans, and shellfish
     fruit and vegetable juices
     gelatin
     guacamole
     jams, jellies, preserves, and marmalade
     molasses
     vinegar and wine vinegar
     wine and sparkling wine (even if the alcohol is cooked off)
Salicylate Sensitivity

Sulfites are usually not added to very-high-quality foods. Many manufacturers, especially of organic
products, pride themselves on being sulfite-free, so that’s worth looking for on labels or inquiring
about. Sulfites are added to many medications, including (paradoxically) some of those used to treat
asthma and allergic reactions. In fact, sulfites in medications are far more likely to be the more
dominant source of sulfite exposure than food. If you aren’t sure if the medications you take contain
sulfites, ask your pharmacist or contact the manufacturer. Sodium sulfite can also be found in
moisturizers, cleansers, shampoos, conditioners, and yeast-infection creams. Because some people do
have skin sensitivity to sulfites, this is something to keep in mind, especially if you have an
autoimmune disease affecting the skin.
      Salicylates are the salts and esters of salicylic acid, an organic acid that is a key ingredient in
aspirin and other pain medications. Salicylic acid is frequently found in cosmetics and beauty
products and naturally occurs in varying concentrations in plants. In plants, salicylates act as an
immune hormone, protecting the plants against diseases, insects, fungi, and bacterial infection.
      Salicylates are converted into salicylic acid in the body. Salicylic acid is toxic in high doses and
is one of the leading causes of death from accidental poisoning. In high doses, its effects include:


     Respiratory alkalosis. Salicylic acid stimulates the respiratory center in the brain stem. This
     causes hyperventilation, which increases the pH of the blood (making it less acidic and more
     alkaline).
     Metabolic acidosis and hyperthermia. Salicylic acid interferes with mitochondrial metabolism
     (the Krebs cycle; see here), which limits ATP production and causes a shift from aerobic to
     anaerobic metabolism. This results in a buildup of pyruvic and lactic acid and an increase in
     heat production, thus lowering the pH of the blood (making it more acidic and less alkaline) and
     body tissues and raising body temperature.


     In the initial phases of acute salicylic-acid poisoning, respiratory alkalosis produces alkaline
urine because potassium and sodium bicarbonate are being excreted. Symptoms typically include
nausea, vomiting, excessive sweating, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), vertigo, hyperventilation, rapid
heart hate, and hyperactivity. As poisoning progresses, the urine becomes acidic despite respiratory
alkalosis: the urine becomes acidic because pyruvic and lactic acid build up but also because
potassium levels fall. Additional symptoms that may occur as poisoning progresses include
hyperthermia (fever), agitation, delirium, hallucinations, convulsions, lethargy, and stupor. The final
stages of salicylic-acid poisoning are characterized by dehydration, hypokalemia (low potassium
levels), and progressive metabolic acidosis. Severe salicylate poisoning is fatal if left untreated.
     In the case of salicylate sensitivity, it takes much smaller doses to produce symptoms of toxicity.
Salicylate sensitivity was initially described in terms of adverse drug reactions, and to date most of
the studies regarding it are performed in the context of medications that contain salicylates or
salicylic acid. Although more research is needed, the definition of salicylate sensitivity has expanded
to include sensitivity to foods and to cleaning and beauty products that contain high levels of
salicylates. The typical reactions are gastrointestinal, asthma-related, or pseudoanaphylactic (the
symptoms of anaphylaxis through a non-IgE-antibody-mediated pathway). Symptoms of salicylate
sensitivity include:


     asthma and other breathing difficulties, such as persistent cough
     changes in skin color
     depression and anxiety
     fatigue
     headaches
     itchy skin, hives, or rashes
     memory loss and poor concentration (linked to ADHD)
     nasal congestion or sinusitis
     sore, itchy, puffy, or burning eyes
     stomach pain, nausea, or diarrhea
     swelling of hands, feet, eyelids, face, or lips (angioedema)
     tinnitus




     There is no diagnostic test for salicylate sensitivity. The only way to determine if you are
sensitive to salicylates is to significantly reduce your exposure to them and see if you get better. This
involves avoiding oral but also topical and inhaled exposure, since salicylic acid is readily absorbed
through the skin and lungs. The following products usually contain substantial amounts of salicylates
or salicylic acid:


     acne products
     air fresheners
     Alka-Seltzer
     breath mints
     bubble baths
     chewing gum
     cleaning products
     cosmetics
     detergents
     fragrances and perfumes
     hair sprays, gels, and mousse
     lipsticks and lip glosses
     lotions
     lozenges
     medications (including aspirin and other NSAIDs)
     mouthwash
     muscle-pain creams
     pain relievers
     shampoos and conditioners
     shaving cream
     skin cleansers and exfoliants
     soaps
     sunscreens and tanning lotions
     toothpaste
     topical creams
     wart and callus removers


     It is extremely important to emphasize that salicylic acid is believed to be an essential
micronutrient, potentially even qualifying as a vitamin. It appears to have essential anti-inflammatory,
anti-atherogenic and antineoplastic roles, meaning that it may prevent cardiovascular disease and
cancer. Some researchers believe that diets rich in fruits and vegetables decrease the rates of
cardiovascular disease and cancer because of the benefits of dietary salicylic acid—giving salicylic
acid a greater role than fiber, vitamins, and minerals! Even in the case of salicylate sensitivity,
whether or not food sources of salicylates should be avoided in addition to medications and
environmental sources (which are by far the bigger contributors to salicylate exposure) is a hot topic
of debate.
     Salicylate sensitivity may be a consequence of omega-3 fatty acid or zinc deficiency. One of
salicylic acid’s jobs is to inhibit production of proinflammatory prostaglandins as a result of the
cox2-mediated metabolism of arachidonic acid (see here). However, salicylic acid might not be able
to do this if there is insufficient DHA and EPA in the cell membranes. Studies evaluating
supplementation with high doses of omega-3 fatty acids (in the form of fish oil) in people with
salicylate sensitivity show enormous reductions in symptoms. Animal studies also show that
supplementation with zinc (concurrent with toxic doses of salicylic acid) prevent the symptoms of
salicylate poisoning.
     Salicylate sensitivity has been implicated as a key player in many gastrointestinal disorders,
such as colitis and Crohn’s disease, and in asthma (which is why aspirin and other NSAIDs are not
recommended for asthmatics). However, as already discussed, omega-3 fatty acid and zinc
deficiency, which are probably contributors to these conditions (see here and here), may be the
critical link between salicylates and immune and autoimmune disorders.
      Studies evaluating the levels of salicylates (and the related compounds known as
acetylsalicylates) show that dietary intake is typically very low, especially compared with other
types of exposure. (These results are used to justify the use of aspirin as preventive therapy for
cardiovascular disease and acetylsalicylate drugs for cancer treatment.) What this most likely means
for those with salicylate sensitivity is that avoiding salicylate-containing foods (especially given that
many of the foods highest in salicylates, such as nightshades and alcohol, are already excluded from
the Paleo Approach) is probably not necessary—especially if your diet is rich in omega-3 fatty acids,
zinc, and all essential nutrients.
      If you do have diagnosed salicylate sensitivity, eat foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids and zinc
(see the nutrient tables on see here). You may wish to have your electrolytes tested (a simple blood
test) because of the effects that salicylic acid may have on them, especially potassium. In the case of
electrolyte imbalance, eating foods that contain lots of the electrolytes you are deficient in will be
beneficial. The following foods are the biggest sources of salicylates on the Paleo Approach:


     all dried fruits and fruit juices
     asparagus
     black tea
     green apples
     nectarines
     many herbs and spices (cinnamon, rosemary, thyme, oregano, turmeric, and mint)
     most berries
     oranges
     pineapples
     tangerines




Cross-Contamination

If you do have food allergies, intolerances, or sensitivities, even a trace amount of that substance may
be a problem, the operative word being may: for example, gluten may elicit extremely violent
reactions even in very small quantities in some individuals, but a FODMAP intolerance may produce
symptoms only if consumption exceeds a certain quantity. But if there are foods that you react strongly
to, it’s important to be very conscious of the possibility of cross-contamination.




     What About Other Sensitivities?
There are other commonly diagnosed (and self-diagnosed) food sensitivities, such as sensitivity to
monosodium glutamate (sometimes known as free glutamate sensitivity) and sensitivity to oxalates or
oxalic acid (see here), even though very limited scientific evidence supports their existence. In
addition, a variety of sensitivities may be a direct consequence of your autoimmune disease,
especially in the case of diseases that affect the liver or kidneys. If you know that you have a reaction
to any food or group of foods, regardless of whether it is a sensitivity that is well documented in the
literature and regardless of whether or not those foods are included on the Paleo Approach, you
should avoid eating them.



     For example, if you live in a home in which others are eating gluten-containing foods, you will
need to be extra mindful during food preparation and take precautions to ensure that even trace
amounts of those foods do not contaminate your plate. Designate one cutting board for gluten-
containing foods and another for non-gluten-containing foods (and do not keep them nestled together).
Keep those foods in separate cupboards or areas of the fridge and freezer. Wear gloves when you
handle foods that contain gluten—better yet, have someone else handle them. Best option: Have
whoever is eating gluten in your house read chapter 2 so that he or she will be motivated to stop
eating it. Wash everything very well if you are going to be using the same utensils for gluten-
containing and gluten-free foods.
     These precautions may be excessive for your particular sensitivity, and certainly not everyone
needs to go such extremes. But if you aren’t healing and you aren’t sure why, cross-contamination may
be the culprit. You should also reexamine ingredients labels. Some “spices” may be hidden sources
of problematic foods. Read the labels of all foods, medications, and supplements in your home. Be
aware of foods that are commonly contaminated during production (see here). If you are not healing
rapidly and are eating something that you aren’t 100 percent sure is safe, try excluding that food from
your diet for three to four weeks and see if your symptoms start abating.
The Need for Organ-Function Support

You may need organ-function support because of your autoimmune disease (for example, type 1
diabetes or Hashimoto’s thyroiditis) or because of the strain on your body from micronutrient
deficiencies, generalized inflammation, or a leaky gut. (For example, your liver may be strained with
the task of filtering endotoxins from the blood that leak in from the gut.)
      If you have been taking medication to support organ function as a result of your autoimmune
disease, you may wish to decrease your dose or discontinue it completely once you adopt the Paleo
Approach. As already mentioned, this should be done under the guidance of a qualified health care
professional, since organ-function tests (such as those for thyroid hormone levels) will need to be
performed frequently to assess your need for medication. It is easy to get overzealous once you start
to see improvement in your symptoms. While it might be appropriate for some people on some meds
to simply stop taking them, other people may not regain full organ function and will need to remain on
medication indefinitely. It is important to discuss changes to medications with your doctor before
making them.
      Compensating for poorly functioning organs goes beyond those organs attacked by your disease.
It is common for certain organs, especially the thyroid and liver, to be stressed in autoimmune
disease, regardless of which autoimmune disease you have. This may or may not be happening in your
body, but it is worth investigating if you are not experiencing the results you anticipated on the Paleo
Approach.
      Thyroid hormones control metabolism, so a healthy thyroid gland is essential for good health.
No one knows how prevalent subclinical thyroid function (meaning that thyroid function isn’t
technically low but isn’t optimal, either) is in autoimmune disease, but it’s not uncommon, and it may
be interfering with your recovery. Symptoms include fatigue, weight gain or the inability to lose
weight, depression, irritability, restlessness, dry skin, hair loss, brittle fingernails, and heavy menses
for women.
      A complete thyroid blood panel (which is more comprehensive than what is typically done as
part of a physical exam) is the best measurement of thyroid function. If your thyroid function is a little
low but not low enough to require thyroid hormone supplementation, you may wish to have your
iodine, selenium, iron, and zinc levels tested (and consider dietary strategies or targeted
supplementation to address deficiencies). Very-low-carbohydrate diets and very-high-carbohydrate
diets can put a strain on the thyroid, so it is important to make sure that you are eating enough but not
too many carbohydrates (see here). Cortisol also has a profound effect on thyroid function, so
managing stress and getting adequate sleep may be all you need to do to get your thyroid in tip-top
shape again.
      A variety of the factors that contribute to autoimmune disease also have a negative impact on the
liver, including endotoxin and other toxins entering the body as a result of gut dysbiosis and gut-
barrier dysfunction (see here), high fructose intake (see here), proinflammatory cytokines secreted by
immune cells elsewhere in the body, and deficiency in nutrients necessary for liver function. The liver
may also be strained from heavy metal toxicity (see here), which can be diagnosed with blood tests
and analyses of hair or fingernails. Given the vast number of systems in the body that rely on optimal
liver function, it’s no surprise that the liver may need a little support.
      Milk thistle (Silybum marianum) has been studied in the treatment of liver disease. The active
component, silymarin, is found in the entire plant but is concentrated in the fruit and seeds. Silymarin
is a potent antioxidant and acts as a toxin blockade by inhibiting toxins from binding to membrane
receptors on the surface of liver cells (called hepatocytes). Silymarin can protect the liver from being
injured by, for example, different toxins, radiation, and iron overload. It has been successfully used to
treat alcoholic liver disease, acute and chronic viral hepatitis, and toxin-induced liver diseases.
(There are also some studies showing no effect of silymarin and many studies showing that vitamin C
is just as good.) While seeds are generally avoided on the Paleo Approach, milk thistle seed extract
may be a beneficial supplement (unless the very small amount of alcohol in the supplement is not
tolerated; see here). Milk thistle tea is also a good option.
      Nutrients that support methylation, from either supplements or food, can also be helpful in
generally supporting liver function (see here). These include selenium, sulfur, betaine, and B vitamins
(especially B6, B9, and B12; see here). Additionally, molybdenum, selenium, magnesium, and alpha
lipoic acid may be beneficial in the treatment of heavy metal poisoning.
Tightening Up Blood-Sugar Regulation

If you have a history of health conditions indicative of metabolic derangement (such as obesity, high
blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, very high blood cholesterol levels, type 2 diabetes, or
gestational diabetes), you may need to make a greater effort than others to regulate your blood sugar.
However, even if you don’t, cortisol dysregulation, insulin resistance, leptin resistance, and even
some nutritional deficiencies may be impacting blood-sugar control, and you may need to regulate
your blood-sugar levels more rigorously to restore hormone balance so you can heal. In fact, some
autoimmune diseases, such as psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, are being linked to metabolic
syndrome even if other risk factors aren’t present.
      The easiest way to ensure that your blood-sugar levels are regulated is to use a glucometer,
which was already discussed on see here. However, before you purchase one, you may want to take a
critical look at the sugar content of your diet. For example, if you notice that you’re going overboard
on treat recipes or that you’re eating tons of fruit or moderate-glycemic-load vegetables, you’ll want
to cut back on those carbohydrates and see if your symptoms improve. Some people just can’t handle
fruit at all, probably because of the greater impact fruit has on blood sugar compared with other
carbohydrate sources, like starchy vegetables.
      Sugar cravings typically indicate unsuccessful stress management or inadequate sleep. It may be
easier to address stress and sleep than to abstain from indulgences. Once your stress is under control
and you are getting enough sleep, reducing your sugar intake won’t be such a big deal. Some people
find that taking an L-glutamine supplement on an empty stomach decreases sugar cravings. (It can also
help restore the barrier function of the gut; see here.) Others find that eating a spoonful of coconut oil
between meals helps. Still others need a full-on sugar detox, such as the program outlined in The 21-
Day Sugar Detox, by Diane Sanfilippo (which can be done in conjunction with the Paleo Approach),
to prompt a metabolic shift to make sugar cravings disappear.
      In addition, some supplements may help restore insulin sensitivity if you’ve already made the
positive diet and lifestyle changes outlined in this book. These supplements include chromium
(abundant in oysters, organ meat, muscle meat, apples, bananas, spinach, and molasses), myo-inositol
(abundant in fresh fruit, especially cantaloupe and citrus fruits), alpha lipoic acid (abundant in organ
meat, muscle meat, leafy greens, broccoli, and Brussels sprouts), coenzyme Q10 (exceptionally
abundant in heart meat and other organ meats; see here), and cinnamon.
Micronutrient Deficiencies

Deficiencies in vitamins or minerals may be hampering your body’s ability to heal. Unfortunately, it
may be challenging to restore levels of some micronutrients when the gut is severely damaged, which
may lead to a stalemate in which the gut is too damaged to absorb certain nutrients, but those nutrients
are required to repair the gut. In these circumstances, diagnosing specific micronutrient deficiencies
may be very helpful, and targeted supplementation may be appropriate.
     Micronutrient deficiencies are usually diagnosed through blood tests, although urine tests are
sometimes more informative. Once comprehensive testing is performed and micronutrient status is
established, you can work with a health care provider to develop a plan of action to restore those
micronutrients to appropriate levels.
     The fix isn’t always as simple as taking a supplement for whatever you are deficient in, which is
why it is so important to work with a qualified professional. Sometimes a deficiency in one
micronutrient actually reveals a need for another, typically one that acts as a cofactor. For example,
vitamin C is required for iron absorption, so anemia may indicate the need for more dietary vitamin C
rather than the overt need for more iron. While some doctors will simply prescribe an iron
supplement for anemia, taking a vitamin C supplement with meals that contain iron-rich foods (such
as red meat and shellfish) may be much more effective for restoring iron levels. The same is true of
micronutrient excesses. For example, excess iodine (as is sometimes the case in both Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis and Graves’ disease) may indicate selenium deficiency (see here), and studies show that
selenium supplementation can quickly restore both iodine levels and thyroid hormone levels to
normal.
     Another example is vitamin D deficiency, which is very common in autoimmune disease (see
here). There is evidence that people with autoimmune diseases or systemic inflammation, or who are
obese, may be less able to absorb vitamin D from the small intestine. This is typically a direct result
of a decreased ability to absorb lipids (as might happen if the liver, kidneys, or gallbladder aren’t
functioning well or if you have low stomach acid production—see here—but also if you have a
damaged gut barrier). In this case, supplementation with vitamin D3 or, better yet, consumption of
foods loaded with vitamin D (or whole-foods-based supplements like fermented cod liver oil) should
be done in conjunction with digestive-support supplements (see here).
     Despite the benefit of supplements, nutrition should be obtained from food sources whenever
possible, even when addressing micronutrient deficiencies. There are two reasons for this. First, for
the vast majority of micronutrients, there is a healthy range. As discussed in chapter 2, deficiencies in
many micronutrients are common and linked to autoimmune disease. However, too much of many
micronutrients can cause health issues as well, some of which may be life-threatening. It is far, far
more difficult (if not impossible) to overdose on any particular micronutrient when it comes from
food. Second, there is a great deal of synergy between different vitamins and minerals. When you
consume them in the appropriate quantities, they protect you from the harmful effects of overdoing one
or another, and their benefits together are often greater than their benefits separately. Food generally
contains all the good stuff you need in the right quantities and ratios.
     Once you know which micronutrients you are deficient in, you can incorporate large amounts of
foods loaded with them (using the information in the nutrient tables on see here) into your diet
(making sure that you are still eating variety and a balance of animal and plant foods). Combining this
strategy with digestive-support supplements can often do the trick in reversing deficiencies.
      If you choose to take a supplement, please do so under a doctor’s supervision. In most cases,
dosage will need to be carefully calibrated based on the specifics of your particular condition. Some
micronutrients will have to be compounded with cofactors to aid absorption or prevent toxicity.
Follow-up testing will also be necessary to gauge the efficacy of the supplementation. With most
micronutrients, supplementation should be short term, to address a deficiency or promote healing.
After normal levels are restored, especially if this is the final piece in the puzzle to permit healing of
the gut, supplementation should no longer be needed.
Does Your Body Need Help Repairing Your Gut?

A variety of supplements purport to help protect or heal the lining of the gut and restore gut-barrier
function. They may be beneficial, especially if you have micronutrient deficiencies because of
malabsorption or have an autoimmune disease in which the tissues of the gut are attacked, such as
celiac disease and inflammatory bowel diseases. But caution is advised, since many of these
supplements are also immune enhancers.
     The amino acid glutamine is currently the best-known compound for reducing intestinal
permeability. In fact, a leaky gut can be caused by glutamine deficiency. Glutamine is actually the
preferred fuel source for both enterocytes and the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (see here).
Glutamine deficiency may be a direct result of the increased utilization of glutamine by the overactive
immune system in autoimmune disease, thereby propagating a leaky gut. Glutamine works in concert
with other amino acids, such as leucine and arginine (see here), to maintain gut integrity and gut-
barrier function. It is also essential for proper immune function. Glutamine supplementation has been
shown to benefit patients with inflammatory bowel diseases as well as a variety of other conditions
affecting the integrity of the gut. (Dosage ranges from 0.3 to 0.5 grams per kilogram of body weight,
which means approximately 10 to 40 grams per day.) Because glutamine is a fuel source for all
epithelial cells, it may also be helpful in autoimmune diseases affecting other epithelial-cell barriers,
such as the skin and lungs. You can buy L-glutamine in powdered form, which mixes easily with
water. Amino acid supplements are generally best absorbed when taken on an empty stomach.




     A variety of mucilaginous plants—including licorice root, slippery elm, marshmallow root, and
aloe—are noted for their ability to help repair the gut barrier because they thicken the gut’s mucus
layer. But since they may be immune stimulators, they should be avoided in the presence of
autoimmune disease. Licorice root, slippery elm, and aloe all have immune-stimulating properties.
Aloe has been shown to dramatically increase cytokine production, especially cytokines that stimulate
Th2 cells. Licorice root (or an extracted compound from licorice root called glycyrrhizin) enhances
the secretion of cytokines by macrophages known to stimulate Th1 cells. Fortunately, there is a
supplement called deglycyrrhizinated licorice (DGL), in which the immune-stimulating glycyrrhizin
has been removed, and this may be a good option for supporting the repair of the gut barrier. If you
take DGL, look for a capsule form, since chewables and lozenges tend to contain undesirable
ingredients, like sugar alcohols (see here).
     Another supplement often recommended for improving gut-barrier integrity is bovine colostrum.
However, it is not clear whether this supplement is beneficial or may even make a leaky gut worse.
For example, bovine colostrum reduces the intestinal permeability caused by NSAIDs (see here) but
significantly increases intestinal permeability caused by endurance exercise (see here).
Does Your Body Need Help Modulating Your Immune System?

Before you consider taking supplements or medication to restore normal immune function, make sure
that you are following the Paleo Approach to the best of your ability: it already provides vast
quantities of immune-supporting nutrients and addresses lifestyle factors to regulate your immune
system. Certainly, sometimes supplements are also necessary, and the most powerful strategy for
modulating the immune system will probably be supporting digestion and restoring normal
micronutrient status (see here and here). However, some other supplements with potentially
beneficial immune-modulating properties might be worth considering if your other efforts are not
fruitful.
      Antioxidant deficiency is common in autoimmune disease (see here). So it’s no surprise that a
variety of antioxidant supplements may help reduce inflammation. Vitamin C (which was discussed in
detail on see here) has anti-inflammatory properties and has even been shown to decrease damage
and inflammation caused by Helicobacter pylori infection. Glutathione is a primary antioxidant in the
gut (and indeed the whole body). Besides selenium supplementation to support natural glutathione
production, supplementation with an acetylated derivative of reduced glutathione called S-acetyl
glutathione has been shown to effectively restore glutathione levels within cells and may even be
beneficial for HIV. Alpha lipoic acid, a powerful antioxidant, inhibits cytokine production by
inflammatory cells. It also directly recycles and prolongs the metabolic life span of vitamin C,
glutathione, and coenzyme Q10 (see here) and indirectly enhances vitamin E recycling (see here).
      Ginger has some intriguing properties that may be very beneficial to those with autoimmune
disease. Besides its ability to aid digestion, it has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial
properties. It reduces production of cytokines by inflammatory cells (including both macrophages and
Th1 cells), it inhibits antigen presentation by macrophages (see here), decreases T cell proliferation,
and even inhibits the synthesis of prostaglandins and leukotrienes (see here).
      Resveratrol is often recommended to help modulate the immune system. Resveratrol is a
polyphenol found in high concentrations in red grapes, red wine, berries, acai, and Itadori tea. It has
potent anti-inflammatory properties and may help prevent cancer and lower the risk of heart disease.
However, the effects of resveratrol on the immune system are complicated. Low concentrations
actually stimulate the immune system, including activation and cytokine production by both Th1 and
Th2 cells and activation of cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells (see chapter 1). Conversely, high
concentrations of resveratrol suppress the immune system. Studies have also shown that resveratrol
can inhibit Th17 cells (although whether this effect is dose-dependent is not known). There are
conflicting results regarding the effect of resveratrol on regulatory T cells, with some data suggesting
that it enhances regulatory T cells and others suggesting that it suppresses them. And while
resveratrol can kill tumor cells, it can kill normal cells as well, including lymphocytes and the cells
that line the blood vessels (endothelial cells). In addition, resveratrol is a phytoestrogen (see here).
Many people find resveratrol to be beneficial, but extreme caution is advised for supplementing with
it.
      Curcumin (which is isolated from the spice turmeric) is often recommended as an immune
modulator. However, as with resveratrol, the actual effects on the immune system are complicated.
Curcumin has potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, and a variety of studies have
shown that it can modulate the activation of T cells, B cells, macrophages, neutrophils, natural killer
cells, and dendritic cells. Curcumin supplementation may decrease secretion of a variety of
proinflammatory cytokines. However, at low doses, curcumin increases proinflammatory cytokine
production and enhances antibody responses. Furthermore, curcumin suppresses the activity of
regulatory T cells. Curcumin is also an irritant, and Material Safety Data Sheets for its laboratory use
warn of severe skin, eye, and mucus-membrane irritation. Common side effects of taking curcumin at
high dose or for a prolonged period include nausea and diarrhea. Many people find curcumin to be
beneficial (and animal studies show it to be helpful for rheumatoid arthritis and colitis); however, use
extreme caution if you choose to supplement with curcumin.
     Quercetin also has anti-inflammatory properties, but, again, exercising extreme caution is
advised. Quercetin inhibits dendritic-cell activation, decreases proinflammatory cytokine production,
and inhibits antigen presentation (see here). It decreases Th2-cell activation but increases Th1-cell
activation in animal models of asthma.
     Naltrexone is a drug that was developed to treat opioid addiction. At high doses, it is a
competitive antagonist of opioid receptors, meaning that it binds to opioid receptors in the brain more
strongly than either opioid drugs (like morphine or heroine) or the body’s own opioids (like
endorphins) do. At low doses, naltrexone reduces production of proinflammatory cytokines and
neurotoxic reactive oxygen species (see here) by suppressing microglia cells (see here), which
happens through binding of a different receptor than the opioid receptor, specifically a Toll-like
receptor (see here). Because of its effect on microglia cells, low-dose naltrexone may be beneficial
for people struggling with gut-brain-axis problems (see here). Low-dose naltrexone was first
investigated for use in HIV patients in the late 1980s (and was beneficial). More recently, trials using
low-dose naltrexone (from three to five milligrams) have shown reduced symptom severity in
fibromyalgia, Crohn’s disease, multiple sclerosis, and pruritus associated with systemic sclerosis.
Because low-dose naltrexone can also reduce pain (through a reactive increase in endorphin
production), it may be an option to discuss with your doctor if you are currently taking opioid- or
NSAID-based painkillers and trying to discontinue their use in order to heal your gut.
A Few Notes on Supplements

If you have been struggling with autoimmune disease for some time, and especially if you have been
trying to heal your body naturally, you may be taking an assortment of supplements, including vitamins
and minerals but also some that fall under the natural, herbal, botanical, medicinal, and homeopathic
rubrics. They may have been recommended by your doctor or by an alternative health care
practitioner, or perhaps you read about them in a book or on a website or heard about their benefits
from a friend or a knowledgeable salesperson. While some of these supplements truly may be helping
your body heal, some may be obstructing the healing process or even exacerbating your disease.
       It’s important to note that many supplements that are frequently recommended, even by health
care professionals, are not appropriate for everyone with autoimmune diseases. This is especially
true of the “immune enhancers,” often used in strategies aimed at balancing the activity of Th1 and
Th2 cells (see here), which include a variety of herbs (often marketed as enhancing the immune
system in natural cold remedies): elderberry, goldenseal, echinacea, ginseng, and quercetin, among
others. If an herbal supplement is touted for boosting the immune system, it should probably be
avoided by those with autoimmune disease.
       Supplements have been discussed throughout this chapter, both in the context of supplements that
may be helpful in certain circumstances and commonly recommended supplements that are probably a
bad idea for most people. However, just as there is a great deal of individuality in terms of the causes
of autoimmune disease in the body, there is a great deal of individuality in terms of response to
supplements. If something doesn’t work for you, stop using it (even if all the scientific studies support
it). If something does work for you, keep using it (even if it hasn’t been validated scientifically). All
the information in this chapter is designed to help you open an informed dialogue with your health
care professional so that you can optimize a treatment plan for your situation.
       It’s also important to understand that if “a little helps a little,” that doesn’t mean “a lot helps a
lot.” The vast majority of supplements discussed in this section are harmful if an inappropriately high
dose is taken. One of the challenges of supplementation is that the vast majority of these supplements
can be purchased without a prescription in just about any natural food, supplement, or vitamin store.
This makes it easy to have a false sense of security both in their safety and in their efficacy. With all
supplements, it is important to discuss which brand, what dose, when to take it, how long to take it,
what adverse effects to look for, when to stop taking it, what to take it with, what not to take it with,
when to evaluate whether it’s working, and what benefits to expect from taking it with a qualified
health care professional. The vast majority of the supplements discussed in this chapter are nutrients
or compounds that can be found in food or that the body produces naturally when stress is managed,
when you are getting enough sleep, and when your body is getting the nutrition it needs. Especially
when it comes to these types of supplements, my advice is to just eat real food, manage your stress,
and get plenty of sleep.
Supplements mentioned in this chapter (and elsewhere):
alpha lipoic acid                acidophilus
adaptogens                       aloe
antibiotics                      antiparasitic drugs
apple cider vinegar              ashwagandha
Astragalus membranaceus          avena sativa
barberry                         betaine HCl
Bifidobacterium                  bile salts
bovine colostrum                 cat’s claw
chamomile tea                    chlorella
chromium                         cinnamon
coconut oil                      cod liver oil
coenzyme Q10                     collagen
Cordyceps sinensis               curcumin
DGL                              DHA
DHEA                             digestive enzymes
echinacea                        electrolytes
EPA                              fermented cod liver oil
fermented foods                  GABA
garlic                           gelatin
ginger                           gingko
ginseng                          glycine
glycyrrhiza                      goldenseal
huperzine                        hydrochloric acid
iodine                           iron
L-acetyl-carnitine               L-glutamine
lactobacillus                    lactoferrin
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) lemon juice
licorice root                    magnesium
magnesium glycinate        magnesium taurinate
marshmallow root           MCT oil
milk thistle (silymarin)   mint tea
molybdenum                 monolaurin
myo-inositol               N-acetylcysteine
naltrexone                 oat seed (Avena sativa)
olive leaf extract         omega-3 fatty acids
oregano oil                Oregon grape
ox bile                    papaya enzyme
pau d’arco                 potassium
probiotics                 quercetin
resveratrol                S-acetyl-glutathione
Schisandra chinensis       selenium
slippery elm               soil-based organisms
spirulina                  sulfur
vitamin B6                 vitamin B9
vitamin B12                vitamin C
vitamin D3                 wormwood
zinc
Troubleshooting Checklist

Need some help narrowing it down? Use this handy checklist to see what you’ve got nailed down
tight, what needs improving, what might be worth a try, and what you can discuss with your
doctor.

Diet



         I am complying with all the recommendations of the Paleo Approach.
         I am successfully avoiding all trace exposure to gluten and other grains.
         I am successfully avoiding dairy, legumes, nightshades, nuts, and seeds.
         I have double-checked ingredients on supplements, medications, spices, and prepackaged
         and preprepared foods.
         I eat offal two to five times a week or more.
         I eat seafood at least three times a week.
         I eat large portions of vegetables.
         I eat the rainbow.
         I eat green foods with most meals.
         I eat glycine-rich foods.
         I avoid high blood-sugar levels by moderating my intake of high-glycemic-load foods.
         My blood-sugar levels are well regulated (particularly relevant if I have history of
         diabetes, obesity, or metabolic syndrome).
         I eat appropriately sized meals with an appropriate amount of time between them.
         I eat quality fats.
         I eat variety.
         I eat probiotic foods or take a probiotic supplement.
         I use salt that contains trace minerals.
         I source the best-quality foods within my budget.
         I drink plenty of water throughout the day.
         I am working with my doctor to establish whether I have additional food allergies,
         intolerances, or sensitivities and am avoiding foods suspected of causing those reactions.




Digestion
           I take time to sit and enjoy my meals.
           I chew my food thoroughly.
           I focus on my food and the people I am eating with.
           I do not rush to the next activity immediately after meals.
           I do not eat when under duress.
           I avoid drinking excessive liquids with meals.
           I take stomach-acid supplements (if appropriate).
           I take ox bile or bile salts supplements (if appropriate).
           I take digestive-enzyme supplements (if needed).




Circadian Rhythms and Sleep



           I make sure I get eight to twelve hours of quality sleep every night.
           I take naps when I need to.
           I keep my lights dim in the evening.
           I wear amber-tinted glasses for one to three hours before going to bed.
           I spend time outside every day or use a light-therapy box.
           I practice good sleep hygiene (sleeping in a cool, quiet, dark room and making positive
           sleep associations).
           I follow a relatively predictable routine during the day in terms of meals and activity.



Activity



           I engage in mild to moderately intense activity every day.
        I avoid sitting for prolonged periods.
        I avoid excessively strenuous activity.
        I allow my body to adequately rest after any activity that might be somewhat strenuous.



Stress Management



        I am working to decrease stress in my life.
        I say no when I need to.
        I ask for help and accept it.
        I am working to increase my resilience.
        I make sure to have fun every day.
        I make time for an intellectual hobby every day.
        I practice mindful meditation every day.
        I spend time in nature.
        I make time to nurture social connections.
        I have made a variety of small changes to promote relaxation and nurture myself.



The Need for Conventional or Complementary Medicine



        I am taking appropriate medications or undergoing appropriate treatments to support organ
        function (if organs are affected by my disease).
        I have been assessed for food sensitivities and allergies.
        My cortisol levels and thyroid function have been tested.
        I have been evaluated for persistent infections.
        I have been evaluated for heavy metal poisoning.
        I have talked to my doctor about treatments for extreme SIBO.
        I am working with my doctor to determine which medications and supplements may be
        appropriate for me.
        I am working with my doctor to evaluate hormone regulation.
        I am undergoing alternative therapies if I find them helpful.
The Need for Supplements



        I am eating foods rich in vitamins or minerals for which I have a diagnosed deficiency.
        I am taking appropriate supplements to address specific micronutrient deficiencies.
        I am taking digestive-support supplements (if appropriate).
        I am taking a probiotic supplement or eating fermented foods.
        I am working with my doctor to determine if adaptogenic supplements would be beneficial.
        I am working with my doctor to determine if organ-function support or immune-modulating
        supplements or medications are appropriate for me.
        I am avoiding any supplements that might be undermining my other efforts.
Chapter 9
The Long Haul
          “ The art of medicine consists of amusing the patient while nature cures the disease. “
          —VOLTAIRE

Please don’t think that the dietary restrictions in the Paleo Approach are a life sentence. I promise that
there is still an abundance of delicious foods you can enjoy. Plus, if altering your diet and lifestyle
allows you to regain your health, isn’t that worth it? Isn’t giving up the small stuff, like bread, worth
feeling alive again?




Testimonial by Kate Johnson




      “ I was skeptical about the Paleo Approach at first. Would I really see results? How easy
would it be to figure out my symptoms? My biggest challenge was consistency. I could eliminate
all the foods without much difficulty, but I always slipped up when it came to reintroducing foods.
      I was completely successful on my third try. This isn’t to say that I didn’t gain benefits from
my first two imperfect attempts. I very gradually eliminated foods and kept at it, so by the third
go-round the only things I had to stay away from were nightshades and seed-based spices. My
brain didn’t want to believe that tomatoes were a problem, but my body sent very clear signals
after I made some spaghetti sauce. I also had some curry the next day, though, so it was hard to
tell which symptom was caused by which food. That’s why I had to be very careful and consistent
on my third try, introducing foods no sooner than three days apart and recording all my symptoms
in a giant Google spreadsheet.
      In my first two attempts, I learned to trust my body and that the only diet that was right for
me was the one my body determined. Once I remembered how strongly I reacted to eating a certain
food, it was much easier to walk away from it at a party or gathering—it just wasn’t worth the
physical pain and the emotional distress. I don’t think about how long I’ll have to remain on a
modified diet or when I ever will eat ____ again, because that sort of mental distress will derail
your healing faster than an eggplant curry topped with fried eggs, walnuts, and cocoa powder.
      It took a few tries before I was both emotionally and physically ready to fully embrace the
Paleo Approach, but it was one of the best investments I ever made in my health. I learned to trust
my body, follow my instincts, and figure out how to transcend the negative self-talk that was my
biggest obstacle to healing. I was also finally able to put to rest nagging doubts about which food
worked for me and which food did not. Be patient with yourself, experiment with your own pacing
and strategies, and remember that you want a sustainable path to recover your health—and you
deserve it! ”

Kate Johnson blogs at Eat, Recycle, Repeat (eatrecyclerepeat.com).




But I don’t want to talk about the importance of making these changes—we’ve been there, done that in
the past eight chapters. Now I want to talk about what to do after—after you heal your body and feel
like a whole person again. The Paleo Approach is not necessarily the protocol you need to follow for
the rest of your life. In fact, as your body gets healthy, you may be able to successfully reintroduce
many foods into your diet (depending on your own sensitivity to these foods and how completely your
gut has healed). And many people will be able to substantially relax dietary constraints from time to
time (yes, that means cheat) once their disease is in remission.

The goal is to be able to keep your disease in remission on something closer to a standard Paleo or
primal diet (still with an emphasis on nutrient density and food quality), with continued effort to
manage stress, protect circadian rhythms, sleep, and be active.

Let’s be clear: Progressing toward a standard Paleo or primal diet is the goal only if that works for
you. This means that reintroductions will focus on eggs; nuts; seeds (including chocolate!);
nightshades; high-fat, grass-fed dairy products; legumes in edible pods; and the occasional alcoholic
(but gluten-free) beverage. Whether or not particular foods can be successfully introduced and when
will vary from person to person.

Although you will successfully reintroduce some foods into your diet, you will not be reintroducing
anything that causes gut dysbiosis and a leaky gut or that stimulates the immune system. So you can,
for all intents and purposes, say good-bye to gluten and soy forever. Non-gluten-containing grains,
like the occasional serving of white rice or non-GMO organic corn on the cob, might be tolerated by
some people if they’re eaten rarely. Other legumes might be OK if prepared traditionally (which
typically involves soaking or fermenting before thoroughly cooking) and enjoyed infrequently. You
may be able to eat some nightshades, but you might never be able to eat tomatoes and potatoes without
symptoms of your disease resurfacing. You will always need to be aware of which kinds of fats you
are eating, and you will always need to focus on eating a nutrient-dense diet. You will need to be
vigilant and constantly reevaluate how certain foods are or are not working for you. You may need to
return to strict compliance with the Paleo Approach from time to time—during a period of great
stress, for example, or if you accidentally consume a food that causes a resurgence in your symptoms.

Some people will be able to reintroduce all the foods discussed in this chapter, perhaps even
successfully keeping their autoimmune disease in remission with an 80/20 or 85/15 Paleo diet (a
relaxed version of the Paleo diet that allows for two to three “cheat” meals a week). Most likely you
will end up finding a happy medium between the Paleo Approach and a standard Paleo diet,
continuing to omit the specific foods that your body is particularly sensitive to but eating less strictly
than the Paleo Approach allows. It is important to understand that reintroductions won’t work for
everyone, and that some people may need to follow the Paleo Approach to the letter for the rest of
their lives. But it’s hard to know where you stand until you experiment with food reintroductions.




What Does It Mean to Traditionally Prepare Legumes and Gluten- Free Grains?
Traditional preparations of legumes and gluten-free grains involves combinations of soaking,
sprouting, and fermenting prior to cooking. For more information and specific recipes, check out
Nourishing Traditions, by Sally Fallon and Mary Enig.
When Do I Get to Reintroduce Foods?

Being able to successfully reintroduce some foods (even just seed-based spices) can be a big boost to
quality of life for many people. Being able to eat eggs for breakfast or occasionally bake with almond
flour or enjoy a square of dark chocolate from time to time can make a huge difference in terms of
being able to sustain your healthy new habits (see here). However, don’t be too eager to start
reintroducing foods. Generally, the more time you give your body to heal, the greater the likelihood
that you will be able to reintroduce some foods successfully.
      Ideally, you should avoid food reintroductions until your disease is in full remission (which is a
very good indication that your gut has healed substantially, if not completely) and you have fully
adopted the lifestyle aspects of the Paleo Approach. At a bare minimum, you should be strictly
compliant with the Paleo Approach for at least one month (three to four months would be better)
before reintroducing foods. And you should definitely see significant improvements in your symptoms
first, with evidence that your gut has healed substantially and that your immune system is no longer
attacking your body (which will be apparent by how you feel).




     It is very important to make sure that your stress is well managed, that your activity level is
appropriate, that you are getting plenty of sleep every night, and that you are spending time outside
every day before starting food reintroductions, because these all affect your body’s ability to tolerate
foods as you reintroduce them.
     Unfortunately for some, permanent damage to organs or tissues may mean that a full recovery is
not possible, but it doesn’t mean that food reintroductions are impossible. Even though you have
successfully regulated your immune system and healed your gut, you may, for example, continue to
require thyroid hormone replacement therapy if you have Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, or you may not
completely regain your balance if you have multiple sclerosis. If you are in this camp, you can gauge
whether or not you feel ready for some food reintroductions after all of the following are true:
           You are able to completely digest your food (even if you still need digestive-support
supplements) and do not suffer any gastrointestinal symptoms.
           Your autoimmune disease is no longer progressively getting worse.
            You are able to manage your autoimmune disease without DMARDs (see here), steroids
(see here), or NSAIDs (see here).
      Even in the case of aggressive and destructive autoimmune diseases, you should wait until your
symptoms have improved and your disease has stabilized, meaning that whatever symptoms remain
are a result of the permanent damage done to your body and not of your immune system still being on
the attack. If you think that your immune system is still attacking your organs or tissues, it is too early
to start food reintroductions.

A Note on Egg Yolks




Pastured egg yolks are a wonderfully nutrient-dense food and probably the most healthful of all the
foods on a standard Paleo diet that are excluded from the Paleo Approach. While intolerances to egg
yolks are relatively common, egg yolks are unlikely to cause issues otherwise. They are an excellent
source of omega-3 fatty acids, lutein, zeaxanthin, choline, selenium, phosphorus, vitamin A, vitamin
D, and B vitamins. Egg yolks can be reintroduced way before reintroducing other foods.



     If you excluded foods containing FODMAPs from your diet or any other foods because of
suspected sensitivities, these should be the first foods you reintroduce. Foods you are allergic to
should be the last foods you attempt to reintroduce. Any food sensitivity that is probably a result of a
damaged and leaky gut should be tested first because you are much more apt to experience sensitivity
to foods like nuts, seeds, eggs, alcohol, and nightshades if your gut has not healed enough to be able to
tolerate FODMAPs, histamines, salicylates, and the like. If you are still struggling with these
sensitivities, it is too early to tackle food reintroductions. But once these sensitivities are no longer
issues (or are only very minor ones), and once you do start to see substantial improvement in your
disease symptoms, it is time to start testing some foods to see if you can tolerate them.
     When you introduce particular foods is ultimately your choice. How you feel is the best gauge,
and only you will know if you are ready. A word of caution, though: don’t let cravings influence you.
Your decision should come from feeling good and seeing improvement in your disease.
How to Reintroduce Foods

Reintroducing a food after eliminating it from your diet for a while is called an “oral food challenge
test,” an “oral challenge,” or simply a “food challenge.” The suggested procedure for a food
challenge detailed here assumes that you are not allergic to these foods—that is, you do not have an
IgE-mediated reaction to them. If you have a diagnosed allergy to a food and want to perform a food
challenge to see if your allergy persists, consult with your doctor.
      Food challenges are done one food at a time, once every three to seven days. If you generally
tolerate new foods well as you challenge them, you can reintroduce them faster (every three to four
days). If you are sensitive to many foods, you should reintroduce them more slowly (every six to
seven days, or even longer). The basic protocol goes like this: you have a “challenge day” on which
you eat the particular food several times throughout the day; then you avoid the new food (and
anything else out of the ordinary) for three to seven days while you monitor yourself for symptoms to
evaluate how your body is reacting to that food.
      Reintroducing foods can be tricky because non-IgE reactions can take anywhere from an hour to
a few days to manifest (although symptoms generally appear one to four hours after consuming the
food and peak within four to twenty-four hours). Reactions can vary wildly and include any of the
following:


     symptoms of your disease returning or worsening
     gastrointestinal symptoms: tummyache, changes in bowel habits, heartburn, nausea, constipation,
     diarrhea, increased or decreased frequency of bowel movements, gas, bloating, undigested or
     partly digested food particles in stool
     reduced energy, fatigue or energy dips in the afternoon
     food cravings for sugar or fat, or desire for caffeine
     pica (craving minerals from nonfood items like clay, chalk, dirt, or sand)
     trouble sleeping: either falling asleep or staying asleep or just not feeling rested in the morning
     headaches (mild to migraine)
     dizziness or lightheadedness
     increased mucus production: phlegm, runny nose, or postnasal drip
     coughing or increased need to clear your throat
     itchy eyes or mouth
     sneezing
     aches and pains: muscle, joint, tendon, or ligament
     changes in skin: rashes, acne, dry skin, little pink bumps or spots, dry hair or nails
     mood issues: mood swings, feeling low or depressed, being less able to handle stress, increased
     anxiety


      Even having just one of these symptoms may indicate that you are sensitive to a food. Remember
that symptoms can occur even a couple of days after you eat the food. If your symptoms are delayed, it
can be a little tricky to determine whether or not there is a link to the food you are challenging. If you
aren’t sure (perhaps you felt tired the day after a food challenge but had also been up all night with
the baby), go on to the next food (without incorporating the other one back into your diet) and then
revisit that particular food in a couple of weeks. Don’t reintroduce a new food if you have an
infection, had an unusually strenuous workout, got less sleep than normal, are feeling unusually
stressed, or are under any other circumstances that may make interpreting a reaction difficult.
     When you are ready to challenge a food, this is the procedure:
                     First, select a food to challenge. Be prepared to eat it two or three times in one
                     day (but not again for a few days).
                     The first time you eat the food, eat half a teaspoon or even less (one teensy little
                     nibble). Wait fifteen minutes. If you have any symptoms, don’t eat any more.
                     Next, eat one teaspoon of the food (a tiny bite).
                     Wait fifteen minutes. If you have any symptoms, don’t eat any more. Next, eat one-
                     and-a-half teaspoons of the food (a slightly bigger bite). That’s it for now.
                     Wait two to three hours and monitor yourself for symptoms.
                     Now eat a normal-size portion of the food—either by itself or as part of a meal.
                     Do not eat that food again for three to seven days (and don’t reintroduce any other
                     foods in that time, either). Monitor yourself for symptoms.
                Note: Some protocols recommend eating the food a third time on the challenge day
                     (basically having a second normal-size portion of the food, typically with
                     supper), but there is no consensus on whether or not this helps determine food
                     sensitivity. Feel free to eat the food again on the challenge day if you want to.
                     If you have no symptoms in the next three to seven days, you may reincorporate
                     this food into your diet.

      If you are testing a food that would normally be consumed in small amounts (such as a spice), the
most you should eat is a normal serving size. This also means scaling back the amount in step 2—so
instead of starting with half a teaspoon, you would start with a pinch. Alternatively, you can cook a
dish that uses that food (in the case of spices, only one new spice at a time) and scale your portion up
or down to consume the recommended amount of the new foods. For example, if you are challenging
paprika, you could heavily season chicken with paprika and challenge with first a small bite of
chicken, then two bites, then three bites. Two to three hours later, you would eat a whole piece of the
paprika-seasoned chicken.
      The food being challenged may be raw or cooked, depending on your preference: there is no
consensus on which is more accurate for testing food sensitivities.
      Sometimes symptoms can creep up on you. It is easy to want a food to be tolerated so badly that
you ignore your body’s reaction to it until you have been eating that food for so long that you just can’t
ignore the symptoms anymore (which may take several weeks). This is especially easy to do when
symptoms are mild and fairly nebulous (such as mood changes and fatigue). In this case, it may be
difficult to retrace your steps and determine the real culprit. Look to any foods you have been eating
frequently since reintroduction. Eliminate all possible candidates (which might mean the last six or
more foods you reintroduced). When in doubt, roll back to the full-on Paleo Approach for a few
weeks or until your symptoms resolve completely, and then start food reintroductions again (being
more critical and more patient this time, and waiting longer between reintroductions).
      You might be able to tolerate a food if it’s eaten occasionally, but not if it’s part of your
everyday diet. It may be difficult to determine which foods these are, how often you can tolerate them,
and how much of them you can eat. These are often the foods that cause a slow development of
symptoms after reintroduction and the same ones that sent you back to square 1 when you reintroduced
them. If you aren’t sure if a food is causing a reaction, it’s best to avoid it until you have finished
reintroductions and have found a maintenance diet that works for you. You might then reintroduce
these gray-area foods at irregular intervals and in small portions, always monitoring yourself for
symptoms of a reaction. Examples are foods that are high in phytic acid, such as chocolate, nuts, and
seeds (see here), as well as egg whites, coffee, and alcohol, all of which have a small effect if your
gut is healthy and you consume them infrequently (see here, here, and here).
      Alcoholic beverages are an exception to this protocol for reintroductions: you will have just one
small portion on the challenge day (typically in the evening). Drink a small glass and make sure that
the beverage is gluten-free. The maximum you should drink is eight to nine ounces of cider or gluten-
free beer, five ounces of wine, three to four ounces of fortified wine (like sherry, port, or Madeira),
two to three ounces of liqueur, or one to one-and-a-half ounces of spirits. Enjoy your beverage slowly
so you can stop drinking if you notice any immediate symptoms. Wait at least one week before having
another glass. You can gradually increase the frequency of indulgence to about twice a week. (It is
unlikely that those with autoimmune disease will tolerate alcohol in larger doses or more frequently,
but you are welcome to test this for yourself.) Keep in mind that you will feel the effects of alcohol
sooner than you used to—that is, you will be a “cheap drunk”! Please drink responsibly.

A Note on Alcohol
Recall that alcohol consumption has been linked to an increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis and
psoriasis. However, moderate alcohol consumption has also been shown to decrease the risk of some
autoimmune diseases, including Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, celiac disease, type 1
diabetes, and systemic lupus erythematosus. This evidence comes from correlative studies (studies
that compare groups of people with a disease and without and try to tease out differences in their
diets and lifestyles) and describes the risk for developing the disease rather than whether or not
alcohol has an effect on disease management. Meanwhile, a study of people with inactive
inflammatory bowel disease showed that one week of moderate red wine consumption caused a
significant increase in intestinal permeability (and a decrease in stool calprotectin, a marker of
increased inflammatory bowel disease activity). So if you have inactive inflammatory bowel disease
and drink red wine daily, you may be at an increased long-term risk for a relapse. If you have a
history of autoimmune disease, a daily glass of wine may never be your norm.



      You may wish to keep many of these reintroduced foods in reserve as occasional indulgences.
For example, even though you used to drink several cups of coffee a day, you may choose to keep
your coffee consumption extremely minimal even if your challenge was successful. Maybe coffee will
now be a treat you save for Sunday brunch. Some of the foods excluded from the Paleo Approach
(like coffee) create the most havoc when consumed frequently, in large quantities, or in the presence
of a disrupted gut barrier, hormone imbalance, and an overactive immune system. This means that
thinking of these foods as occasional treats is a good way to enjoy them while avoiding the downside
that comes with habitual consumption of them. After all, if giving up coffee was hard for you, do you
really want to get sucked back into an emotional or physical reliance on it? Also keep in mind that
some of these foods may never be well tolerated, even as a once-in-a-blue-moon indulgence, so you
may just decide not to challenge any of the foods most likely to be problematic and assume that you
are healthier without them.

How to Keep Track
Keeping a food journal can be very helpful in identifying which foods are problems for you. The most
basic way to do so is simply to make note of every time you introduce a new food, start a new
supplement, or eat something that isn’t part of your normal routine. If you have a reaction, it’s a
simple matter of checking what out-of-the-ordinary foods you’ve eaten in the last week.
     In the case of mild reactions that make identifying problem foods more challenging, it’s
worthwhile to keep a more detailed journal. Write down all the ingredients of a meal and what time
you ate. Also document what symptoms you experience and when, whether you think they are related
to food or not. These more detailed records can help you or a health care professional identify
patterns and links between foods and symptoms that might not otherwise be obvious.




     Which foods you tolerate may change over time. If you reintroduce a food now and have a
reaction to it, that doesn’t necessarily mean you will never be able to eat that food (although, if your
reaction is dramatic, it may very well be a lifelong sensitivity). Especially if your reaction is mild,
you may want to rechallenge that food in six months or a year. Also, new food sensitivities may
develop. It is possible that a food that you successfully reintroduce now won’t work for you in the
future. (This usually occurs in tandem with increased stress, decreased sleep, infection, or other
assaults on your gut health and immune system.) If a food stops working for you, it’s important to
recognize that as early as possible and exclude it from your diet.
Suggested Order of Reintroduction

The Paleo Approach is essentially an elimination diet, a strategy that has been used by allergists and
other medical professionals for decades. The foods eliminated are those that scientific studies tell us
are the most likely to be harmful in terms of gut health and immune health.
      When it comes to food reintroductions, there is no right or wrong way to choose where to start.
A very good argument can be made that the first foods you reintroduce should be the ones you miss
the most. Another good argument can be made for reintroducing the foods that are least likely to cause
a reaction first or that have the most redeeming nutritional qualities.
      My suggested order of food reintroductions takes into consideration both the likelihood of
reaction (based on what science says about how that particular food interacts with the gut barrier or
the immune system) and the inherent nutritional value of the food. There are four stages. The first
stage includes foods that are most likely to be well tolerated or are the most nutrient-dense. The
second stage includes foods that are less likely to be well tolerated or are less nutrient-dense. The
third stage includes foods that are even more unlikely to be well tolerated. The fourth stage includes
foods that are most likely to be untolerated and that you may never wish to challenge.
      Challenge all the foods in stage 1 that you want to reincorporate (except any that you are allergic
to or have a history of severe reactions to) before moving to stage 2. Follow the same protocol before
moving from stage 2 to stage 3 and then from stage 3 to stage 4. You don’t have to tolerate all the
foods in stage 1 to be able to move to stage 2, but if you don’t tolerate many (or most) of the foods,
take a break from new food reintroductions for a few months and then rechallenge those stage 1 foods.
If you still react to them, wait a few more months and then start challenging stage 2 foods (keeping the
untolerated ones from stage 1 out of your diet).

STAGE 1

egg yolks
legumes with edible pods (green beans, scarlet runner beans, sugar snap peas, snow peas, peas, etc.)
fruit- and berry-based spices
seed-based spices
seed and nut oils (sesame seed oil, macadamia nut oil, walnut oil, etc.)
ghee from grass-fed dairy
STAGE 2

seeds (including whole, ground, and butters, like tahini)
nuts (including whole, ground, and butters, like almond butter), except cashews and pistachios
cocoa or chocolate
egg whites
grass-fed butter
alcohol in small quantities




STAGE 3

cashews and pistachios
eggplant
sweet peppers
paprika
coffee
grass-fed raw cream
fermented grass-fed dairy (e.g., yogurt and kefir)
STAGE 4

other dairy products (e.g., grass-fed whole milk and cheese)
chili peppers
tomatoes
potatoes
other nightshades and nightshade spices
alcohol in larger quantities
white rice
traditionally prepared legumes (ideally soaked and fermented)
traditionally prepared gluten-free grains (ideally soaked and fermented)
foods you have a history of severe reaction to
foods you are allergic to




A Note on Food Quality
Just as food quality is important when following the Paleo Approach, it is important when you are
reintroducing foods to your diet. A study showed that isoflavones from soy-based poultry feed can be
found intact in the eggs laid by those hens. If you are extremely sensitive to soy, then you won’t be
able to tolerate the eggs from hens that are fed soy, but you might be able to tolerate eggs from hens
given soy-free feed. Whether or not gluten or other mischievous proteins can be found intact in eggs
from hens that ingest those substances in their feed has not been measured, but anecdotal accounts
suggest that it is common for people with celiac disease to have reactions to eggs from hens eating
wheat-based feed. So when it comes to reintroducing eggs, try to source local, fresh eggs from fully
pastured hens that are fed no supplemental feed or feed that does not contain soy or wheat (or
anything else to which you might have an adverse reaction). Most local farmers will be happy to
engage in a conversation with you about their chicken feed.
      Chocolate is another food whose quality can make a difference in your ability to tolerate it. Even
in dairy-free dark chocolate, soy lecithin is a common ingredient. How chocolate is processed and
what sweeteners are used can also affect whether or not you tolerate it. Look for organic chocolate
that is sweetened with an organic sugar (typically evaporated cane juice or honey) and is dairy-,
gluten-, grain-, and soy-free.
      Dairy quality can make an enormous difference, not only in how well it is tolerated but also in
its digestibility and its nutrient value. Grass-fed dairy contains good-quality fats (including a healthy
balance of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids and conjugated linoleic acid; see here) and fat-soluble
vitamins (including vitamins A, D, and K2). Raw grass-fed dairy has more benefits but also more
risks than pasteurized. If you can source low-temperature vat-pasteurized milk, it will have many of
the desirable active enzymes present in raw milk but with less chance that it contains infectious
organisms. When cow dairy is not well tolerated, goat, sheep, horse, or camel dairy sometimes is.
      Regarding nuts, preparation may have an impact on how well they are tolerated. It is commonly
postulated that soaking nuts in salted water and then drying them improves digestibility, reduces
enzyme-inhibitor activity, and decreases phytic acid. This has not been documented in the scientific
literature, but anecdotal accounts suggest that many people can tolerate nuts that have been soaked and
dried even if they do not tolerate raw or roasted nuts. If you want to test this for yourself, add one
tablespoon of salt to a bowl with four cups of raw nuts and then add water to cover. Soak for seven to
twelve hours. Discard any floating nuts, drain, rinse, and then dry in a food dehydrator or in an oven
set to the lowest temperature for twelve to twenty-four hours. Alternatively, you can sprout fresh raw
nuts and seeds by soaking them in unsalted water for a day, rinsing, and then keeping them in a jar
with cheesecloth secured over the top in the sunlight and keeping them damp by rinsing them a few
times per day. Most nuts and seeds will sprout in two to four days.
      The foods in stage 4 might normally be allowed (at least as infrequent treats) on a standard
Paleo diet, a primal diet, or a traditional-foods diet, such as one based on Weston A. Price
Foundation guidelines. Especially if your autoimmune disease does not remain in full remission
throughout the process of food reintroductions, you may not want to challenge any of the foods in
stage 4 (or even stage 3).
      Some foods that are similar are divided into two or more stages. This includes nightshades
(stages 3 and 4), dairy products (stages 1, 2, 3, and 4), and both nuts and seeds (stages 1 and 2). If the
foods in these “families” are not tolerated in earlier stages (for example, if ghee causes a reaction),
then do not challenge the other foods in that family in later stages (that is, do not challenge butter,
cream, fermented dairy, or other dairy products).
      If you don’t want to challenge a food (because you don’t like it or because you suspect, given
your history, that it may be particularly problematic for you), then don’t. You don’t have to challenge
any at all if you like how you are feeling and just aren’t tempted by your old foods. There is no
nutritional advantage to adding these foods back in. What’s important is that you find something that
works for you.
      Yes, food reintroductions can be a long process, but reintroducing foods too quickly may cause a
flare in your autoimmune disease, which has the potential to set you back for much more time than it
would have taken to reintroduce foods carefully and methodically.
Why Do I React So Violently to a Food I Used to Eat All the Time?




While many foods that once contributed to your autoimmune disease may be well tolerated after
eliminating them long enough for your gut to heal and your immune system to return to normal activity,
some foods may cause more problems than they did before. In the case of food allergies and
intolerances, you may react much more strongly to some foods now than you did before adopting the
Paleo Approach. This may even be true for minute amounts of these foods, even though they were
once staples of your diet. For example, perhaps you used to eat bread and pasta every day, but now
even the tiniest trace of gluten makes you violently ill. Why the shift?
     Even in a perfectly healthy gut, food-protein antigens are absorbed by a number of different
cells, processed, and then presented to the immune system via antigen presentation as part of the
body’s constant patrol for infectious agents (see here). Dendritic cells stick a long, armlike protrusion
called a dendrite between enterocytes and into the lumen of the gut to “sample” the gut environment in
search of infection. They then migrate to the gut-associated lymphoid tissues to present the food
antigens (or any other antigens the dendritic cell finds) to naïve T cells and B cells. It is actually the
M cell’s job in the Peyer’s patch to constantly sample the environment in the gut in search of antigens
and to present those antigens (from both food and microorganisms) to the cells of the immune system
(see here). Even the enterocytes themselves can absorb some intact food proteins and present them to
activated T cells.
     Recall that when the body “chooses” not to react to an antigen, it is called immune tolerance (see
here). The concept of immune tolerance is relevant to any foods you have an immune reaction to (that
is, food allergies and intolerances). Immune tolerance is generally considered to be a good thing, but,
of course, if you don’t have an immune reaction to a food, you don’t need to develop immune
tolerance to it.
      Immune tolerance relies on a few factors, including genetics and efficient digestion. The more a
protein is broken down, the less immunogenic (immune-stimulating) it is. Just the act of restoring
healthy digestion can make many food sensitivities disappear. Second, it relies on how much of an
antigen crosses the gut barrier. In the case of a leaky gut, much more of a specific food antigen can
cross into the body than when the gut barrier is intact. Lastly, immune tolerance means that the signal
to the immune system is suppressed. The immune response to a food antigen is mediated by Th1, Th2,
and memory cells. Suppressing the activity of these cells is the job of regulatory T cells. Regulatory T
cells can produce specific anti-inflammatory cytokines that inhibit immune-cell activation, or they can
cut the receptors off so the T cells can’t bind to the antigen.
      Immune tolerance to a food antigen is lost when digestion is disrupted, the intestinal barrier is
disrupted, or there are not enough regulatory T cells to quell the immune response.
      An exaggerated response to a food most likely results from a large number of naïve T cells and
memory cells that recognize the food antigen still being present in the body. Recall that these cells act
as sentinels and that the number of cells in circulation that recognize specific antigens decreases
slowly over time since that antigen was last detected. However, thanks to the lack of exposure
through the elimination diet, the numbers of regulatory T cells able to suppress those particular T
cells are already diminished (which may be related to genetics). The exaggerated response originates
from this state of limbo, in which there are still too many naïve T cells that can recognize the food
antigen but not enough regulatory T cells to keep them from getting all riled up. This is called loss of
immune tolerance. As time passes, these reactions should diminish (as the naïve T cells and memory
cells that recognize that food eventually decrease in number, too). It’s not that immune tolerance is
restored (although it may be), but rather that the body “forgets” to react to those foods.
      Other factors may be at play in an exaggerated response to foods now, too. Perhaps the mucus
layer of the gut was thickened before you adopted the Paleo Approach as a protective mechanism—
basically your body’s way of minimizing your exposure to an antigen. Now that your body is healing,
the mucus layer is a more normal thickness, so when you eat a food that you are allergic to or to
which you’ve developed an intolerance, more of it can interact with the immune system. This is
especially likely while your gut is healing and before it has completely healed, at which point the
“sampling” of antigens becomes a much more tightly controlled process.
      If you react severely to a food, don’t eat it. (If you are seriously allergic, talk to your doctor
about getting a prescription for an EpiPen.) There are immune-sensitization protocols that can be
performed under the guidance of an allergist to slowly introduce small amounts of the food antigen to
stimulate the production of regulatory T cells, but this is something to consider only if your
autoimmune disease is in complete remission and you are otherwise perfectly healthy.
      For most, these dramatic reactions will diminish over time given continued compliance with the
Paleo Approach. In fact, the lack of serious reactions to foods is an excellent indicator of gut and
immune health.
Lifelong Health

Adhering to the Paleo Approach will become easier over time. As you begin to see tangible
improvements in your symptoms, your energy level, and even your mental health, you will be more
motivated to continue making choices that support healing. As your body continues to heal and you
become more accustomed to new food habits and new routines, making the best choices for your
health will become easier. As you experiment with new nutrient-dense foods, trying out new recipes
and finding ways to adapt your old favorites, it will quickly become apparent that eating in this new
way isn’t actually that hard, that food can still nourish the soul as well as the body, and that following
a restricted diet does not need to feel like a “diet.” You still get to eat delicious food.

          “ We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit. ”
          —ARISTOTLE

     As you move beyond this initial healing phase and begin to look to the rest of your life with
renewed optimism and a sense of adventure, keep the principles of the Paleo Approach in mind:
       Eat nutrient-dense foods.
       Support gut health.
       Manage your stress.
       Get enough sleep.
       Spend time outside.
       Have fun.
     As you experiment with new foods (and maybe some old foods, too), remember that
micronutrient deficiencies are very closely correlated with autoimmune disease (and chronic illness
in general). Remember that any food that is hard to digest can feed gut dysbiosis and is a lost
opportunity for acquiring nutrients to nourish your body. As you find new hobbies and take on new
challenges, remember to critically evaluate which activities support your health and which undermine
your health—and ditch the latter.




Testimonial by Stacy Toth
     “My story is one of the original, dramatic, before-and-after stories within the Paleo
community, but to me the success hasn’t been the original 135-pound weight loss. I discovered my
own health in the following year, which is the more important element of the story. With a year on
a low-carb, low-nutrient, and high-stress lifestyle, my body was overwhelmed and my hormones
were out of whack. Despite over a year on Paleo, I had a leaky gut, which only became apparent
when I had a flare from a previously unknown autoimmune condition, celiac disease.
     This realization led me to a significant readjustment in how I defined my Paleo lifestyle—a
focus on nutrient density, further elimination of inflammatory foods, stress reduction, proper
sleep, and sunlight. By following all these tenets of the autoimmune protocol, I have now put my
autoimmune condition’s symptoms into remission! My hair, nails, and skin are vibrant and strong,
and near-constant joint pain is a thing of the past. I’m sleeping better and no longer get a splitting
headache, extreme depression, moodiness, and body aches for days when exposed to gluten.
     This protocol is not without effort. It takes commitment to decide that one’s health is of the
utmost importance and commit to doing everything within your power to achieve optimal results.
That includes not just eating, but the lifestyle changes Sarah outlines in The Paleo Approach. With
that effort comes reward. For there is nothing more freeing than realizing that your body is
healing itself and you are in control of your own health.

Stacy Toth and her husband, Matt McCarry, blog at Paleo Parents (PaleoParents.com) and are the
authors of Eat Like a Dinosaur and Beyond Bacon.”



      As your body heals, it will become easier to identify triggers in your diet and elsewhere in your
life. Over time, you will figure out what the most important dietary factors are for you personally—
both foods to avoid and foods to prioritize. Over time, lifestyle triggers will become blatantly
obvious, to the point that you will probably be able to predict exactly how you will feel as a result of
a night of lost sleep or an additional stressor at work. This will help you continue to make healthful
lifestyle choices—what challenges you take on, what responsibilities you accept, and what requests
you say no to.
      Time and experience on the Paleo Approach will enable you to find your own balance between
compliance and sustainability. Time and experience will enable you to find what works for you, what
sacrifices and compromises you are willing to make. It’s only effort until it’s routine.
      What you have learned by reading this book and beginning to implement the protocol are
strategies to maintain your health over the long haul. You have learned how your diet and lifestyle
choices affect your health (and in far more detail than you probably thought you cared about!). You’ve
learned how some foods interact with your immune system and affect the health of your gut. And
you’ve learned why that’s important. You’ve also learned why how you live your life is just as
important as the food you use to fuel your life.
      Remember to be vigilant, but not paranoid. Commit to maintaining awareness of your body, but
without fear of the future. Periodically reevaluate how the choices you make, in terms of both what
you eat and what you do, affect your health. And be willing to adapt and make changes along the way
to continue to optimize your health. Life is a work in progress.
      You now have the knowledge to regain your health and live your life. Go and enjoy it.
Glossary


AA Arachidonic acid, an omega-6 fatty acid.

Acquired Immune System Another name for the adaptive immune system.

Adaptive Immune System The part of the immune system that is specific for a particular foreign
invader.

Adjuvant A substance that stimulates the adaptive immune system. In vaccines, adjuvants are added
to stimulate the immune system because the antigen, typically a dead or inert virus or bacteria, is non-
infectious—the adjuvant is needed for immunity to develop because the dead virus can’t replicate and
stimulate the immune system effectively on its own.

Aerobic Referring to something that requires oxygen.

Agglutinin A protein capable of making red blood cells clump together.

Amino Acid The basic building blocks of all proteins.

Amylase A digestive enzyme that breaks down starch.

Anaerobic Referring to something that does not require oxygen.

Androgen The generic term for any substance that can bind to androgen receptors, such as
testosterone.

Androgen Receptor A specialized receptor that controls gene expression, especially those genes
related to supporting or suppressing male characteristics. Also has roles in controlling fat deposition
and muscle mass.

Antibody A specialized protein, produced by cells of the immune system, that recognizes and binds to
small sequences of amino acids in other (typically foreign) proteins.

Antigen Small fragment of a protein on a pathogen that antibodies bind to.

Antigen Binding Site The part of an antibody that binds to an antigen.

Antigen Presentation The process of presenting or showing the adaptive immune system what
antigens have been found in the body. This can be done by any cell in the body through the major
histocompatibility complex (which tells the immune system whether or not the cell is infected) or by
the phagocytic cells of the innate immune system (which shows the immune system which pathogens
they have phagocytosed).
Anti-inflammatory Anything that counteracts or helps resolve inflammation.

Antinutrient Any substance that prevents the absorption or utilization of nutrients.

Apoptosis A very controlled form of cell death, akin to cell suicide. Uncontrolled cell death is called
necrosis. The difference is that apoptosis does not cause cell fragments or proteins to be released
into the body, but necrosis does.

Autoantibody An antibody that recognizes and binds to small sequences of amino acids in proteins
within the body (rather than foreign invaders). Also called self-targeting antibodies.

Autocrine A fat-based molecule that acts as a signal for communication within a cell (from one part
of a cell to another).

Autoimmune Disease A disease caused by the immune system attacking cells, tissues, or organs in
the body.

Autoimmunity Immunity targeted against oneself. Autoimmunity does not become an autoimmune
disease until damage accumulates and symptoms appear.

B Cells White blood cells (lymphocytes) that produce antibodies. B cells are the main cell type of the
humoral adaptive immune system.

Brush Border Part of the gut barrier composed of enterocytes connected into the sheets of cells that
line the small intestine, forming a continuous layer of microvilli.

Carbohydrate A molecule composed of a chain of sugar molecules. Carbohydrates are both
important fuel for the body and important molecular components of many chemicals (glycoproteins,
glycolipids, membrane carbohydrates) used or produced by the cells of the body.

Catalyst A substance that speeds up the rate of a chemical reaction. In biology, this usually means a
substance (such as a mineral) that speeds up the activity of an enzyme (which facilitates the chemical
reaction).

CD4 A glycoprotein embedded in the outer membrane of the T cell that works together with the T-
cell receptor to recognize foreign invaders. Also helps differentiate between different types of T
cells. CD4-positive T cells play different roles in the body than CD8-positive T cells.

CD8 A glycoprotein embedded in the outer membrane of the T cell that works together with the T-
cell receptor to recognize foreign invaders. Also helps differentiate between different types of T
cells. CD8-positive T cells play different roles in the body than CD4-positive T cells.

Cholesterol A type of fat (technically a type of lipid called a sterol) that is an essential structural
component of cell membranes, steroid hormones, vitamin D, and bile acids.

Chyme The thick acidic fluid, consisting of gastric juices and partly digested food, that passes from
the stomach to the small intestine.

Circadian Rhythm The cycling of biological functions with the twenty-four-hour clock. It is
controlled by specific cells in the brain, but all cells have an internal clock that is synchronized with
the brain’s clock through the rhythm of hormones that circulate through the body. Also called
biorhythm.

Circulation The system of vessels through which blood flows. When something is “in circulation,”
that means it is traveling throughout the body in the blood.

Cofactor A substance that is necessary for an enzyme to perform its activity (and is not what the
enzyme acts on).

Complement A group of twenty-five different proteins produced by the liver that are part of the
innate immune system. They act by binding to the surface of pathogens, sometimes directly killing the
pathogen but also attracting other immune cells.

Correlate A statistical term meaning that two things being measured follow the same pattern. While
correlation does not prove causation (just because two things correlate does not necessarily mean that
one thing causes the other), it does generally imply a link between the two things being measured,
even if that link is not direct.

Cortisol The main stress hormone. Cortisol plays diverse roles in the human body, including
controlling metabolism and the immune system. Also an important circadian rhythm hormone.

Cross-Reactive Antibody An antibody that binds to an antigen that is not specific to one protein, but
instead can be found on two or more proteins.

Cross-Reactor When an antibody binds to more than one protein, any protein that is not the primary
protein the antibody formed against is called a cross-reactor. For example, if an antibody formed
against gluten can also bind to proteins in milk, milk is a cross-reactor.

Crypt The valleys between the villi of the intestine. An important structural aspect of the small
intestine.

Cytokines Chemical messengers of inflammation. Some act as proinflammatory signals to turn on
inflammation, and some act as anti-inflammatory signals to turn off inflammation.

Cytotoxic T Cells White blood cells (T lymphocytes) that are members of the adaptive immune
system and that specialize in attacking cells of the body infected by viruses and some bacteria.

Dendritic Cells Immune cells that reside in barrier tissues of the body (such as the gut and the skin)
and act as sentinels. They are also phagocytes.

DHA Docosahexaenoic acid, very-long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid with important
functions in the body, especially in regulating inflammation and neural health.
Differentiation A kin to cell maturation. The process of a cell becoming the final cell type it is going
to be (types of cells called stem cells or progenitor cells can differentiate into many different types of
cells).

Disaccharide A simple carbohydrate composed of two sugar molecules. For example, sucrose is
composed of one glucose and one fructose molecule.

Duodenum The first segment of the small intestine.

Endocrine Pertaining to hormones, especially organs or glands that secrete hormones. The endocrine
system encompasses everything in the body related to hormones.

Endocytosis The process by which a cell transports something from outside of the cell to the inside
of the cell by wrapping its surface membrane around the target to form a bubblelike structure (the
surface membrane then closes around the target, and the bubble is then inside the cell). When this
“bubble” is internalized, it may be called an endosome, a vesicle, or a vacuole (depending on the size
of the bubble, the exact makeup of the membrane, and what’s inside the bubble).

Endogenous Produced in or otherwise originating from the body. The opposite of exogenous.

Enterocyte The main cell type that forms the gut barrier. Also called intestinal absorptive cells,
enterocytes are a type of epithelial cell and are responsible for transporting nutrients from inside the
gut to the inside of the body.

Enzyme A protein whose function is to coordinate, stimulate, or otherwise control a specific
chemical reaction.

EPA Eicosapentaenoic acid, a long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid with important
functions in the body, especially in regulating inflammation.

Epidemiology The branch of medicine that deals with the incidence, distribution, and control of
diseases, based largely on statistics. Epidemiologists look for correlations between populations and
disease.

Epithelial Barrier A barrier composed predominantly of epithelial cells. The gut barrier is a type of
epithelial barrier.

Epithelial Cell A special type of cell found in all barrier tissues. Epithelial cells are characterized by
having a top (also called the apical side of the cell, where the membrane is organized into fingerlike
projections called microvilli), sides, and a bottom (also called the basolateral side of the cell; the
cell differentiates apical from basolateral via the tight junctions).

Epithelium Tissue composed predominantly of epithelial cells. Gut epithelium is another way to say
gut barrier or gut epithelial barrier.

Etiology The cause or causes of a disease or condition.
Eukaryote (aka eukaryotic cell) An organism whose cells contain complex structures enclosed
within membranes. All animals and plants are eukaryotes.

Exocytosis The opposite of endocytosis. In exocytosis, a bubblelike structure enclosed by a
membrane (an endosome, a vesicle, or a vacuole) merges with the cell’s surface membrane, expelling
its contents outside of the cell in the process. See Endocytosis.

Exogenous Originating outside of the body. The opposite of endogenous.

Expression Gene expression means that the gene is used to form a functional product, typically a
protein. Protein expression means that the protein is made, is modified appropriately, and has been
transported to the area where it can do its job.

Flare A sudden appearance or worsening of symptoms of an autoimmune disease.

Free Radical A highly chemically reactive molecule, typically containing oxygen. (If it contains
oxygen, it may also be called an oxidant.)

GALT (gut associated lymphoid tissue) All the immune tissues surrounding the gut.

Genera The plural of genus.

Genus The second to lowest level of taxonomy grouping (the science of grouping organisms based on
common characteristics). The lowest level is species.

Ghrelin The main hunger-stimulating hormone. Also an important regulator of the immune system.

Gliadin A class of proteins found in wheat and several other cereal grains. A protein fraction of
gluten.

Gluten A type of prolamin found in wheat, rye, and barley.

Glycoalkaloid A type of saponin (a molecule with detergentlike properties) found in nightshade
plants that has adjuvant properties.

Glycocalyx Layer A layer formed by sticky molecules (glycoproteins, glycolipids, proteoglycans,
and polysaccharides). Glycocalyx layers, which function as semipermeable barriers and structural
support, are produced by a variety of cell types, including the gut epithelial cells.

Glycolipid A molecule composed of a type of fat called a lipid and a carbohydrate.

Glycoprotein A molecule composed of a protein and a carbohydrate.

Granulocyte A group of white blood cells that contain organelles called secretory granules (these
granules contain proteolytic enzymes, which the granulocytes can secrete as part of their ability to
attack foreign invaders). Members of the innate immune system. For example, neutrophils, basophils,
eosinophils.

Gut Mucosa The inner lining of the intestines, a type of mucous membrane. The mucus is produced
by specialized cells found among the gut epithelial cells called goblet cells.

Heavy Chain The large polypeptide subunit of a protein complex, such as an antibody. Antibodies
are classified by which of five different heavy chains they contain: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, or IgM.

Helper T Cell A group of T cells that are important for directing other components of the innate and
adaptive immune system. There are several subtypes of helper T cells, including Th1, Th2, Th3, Th9,
Th17, Th22, Tr1, and Tfh.

HLA Gene (human leukocyte antigen gene) The major histocompatibility complex in humans, often
used interchangeably with major histocompatibility complex.

Hormesis Any generally favorable biological response to low-level exposures to toxins and other
stressors.

Hormetic Effect See Hormesis.

Hormone A fat-based molecule produced by many different organs in the body (endocrine organs,
collectively referred to as the endocrine system) that acts as a signal throughout the body, controlling
a vast variety of functions. A long-distance communication system in the body.

HPA Axis The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, sometimes called the limbic-hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis, which describes the cross-talk between the hypothalamus (a region of the
brain), the pituitary gland (in the brain), and the adrenal glands (located on top of the kidneys).

Humoral Immune System The components of the immune system that are not cells, but rather
secreted proteins, such as antibodies, cytokines, and complement proteins.

Immune System A complex system that encompasses everything the body does to protect itself from
pathogens.

Immune Tolerance The process by which the immune system does not attack an antigen. Immune
tolerance is important during pregnancy (so that the immune system doesn’t attack the fetus), organ
transplantation, and to prevent hypersensitivity to food antigens. Used interchangeably with
immunologic tolerance.

Immunity The ability to resist infection by a specific pathogen. The body acquires immunity when the
adaptive immune system “remembers” which pathogens have infected the body before (via memory B
and T cells); also called immunological memory. Vaccines confer immunity by stimulating the
adaptive immune system to produce antibodies against a specific antigen (the inert or dead virus or
bacteria in the vaccine).

Immunological Memory See Immunity.
Immunomodulator A substance that adjusts the immune response to a desired level. An
immunomodulator can stimulate or suppress all or a subset of the immune system (it can stimulate one
subset while suppressing another) or cause the loss or acquisition of immune tolerance.

Immunoregulator A substance that regulates the immune system so that it functions normally.

Immunosuppressant Something that suppresses the immune system, hindering or lowering its normal
activity; typically a drug or treatment, such as radiation.

Immunosuppression The activity of an immunosuppressant. The suppression of the immune system,
typically by a drug or radiation.

Immunotoxin A substance that is toxic to the immune system, altering (typically suppressing) immune
function.

Innate Immune System The part of the immune system that is fastest to respond, but is not specific to
the invading pathogen. The part of the immune system responsible for inflammation.

Intestinal Barrier The lining of the intestines, which provides a physical barrier between the inside
of the gut and the inside of the body. Used interchangeably with gut barrier, gut epithelial barrier,
and mucosal barrier of the gut.

Intestinal Permeability The quantification of how permeable the intestinal barrier is. When intestinal
permeability increases, substances that normally can’t cross the intestinal barrier do. This is also
called a leaky gut.

Jejunum The middle section of the small intestine, between the duodenum and the ileum.

Leaky Gut See Intestinal Permeability.

Lectin A large class of carbohydrate-binding proteins, meaning that they bind to specific
carbohydrates (such as membrane carbohydrates).

Leptin A hunger and adiposity hormone, important for suppressing appetite and regulating the
immune system.

Leukocyte The technical term for a white blood cell.

Leukotriene A group of hormonelike molecules that act as autocrines and paracrines. Leukotrienes
figure prominently in the development of inflammation through their action as proinflammatory
signaling molecules.

Lymph Lymph is composed of a fluid that is essentially recycled blood plasma and lymphocytes.
When blood circulates in the smallest blood vessels in the body, called capillaries, plasma is filtered
out of the blood vessels and bathes all the cells of the body with what's known as interstitial fluid.
Interstitial fluid is then collected back into the lymphatic system (the fluid component of lymph) to be
returned to the blood.

Lymphatic System A network of organs, lymph nodes, lymph ducts, and lymph vessels that make and
move lymph from tissues to the bloodstream. The lymphatic system is a major part of the body’s
immune system and is important for the transport of fatty acids and fats from the digestive system.

Lymphocyte A type of white blood cell found predominantly in the lymphatic system, but also in the
blood and infected tissues. Lymphocytes are produced in the bone marrow.

Lysosome An organelle in cells that contains degradative enzymes. Lysosomes are important for
breaking down waste products and digesting substances internalized via phagocytosis or endocytosis.
Akin to the stomach of the cell.

Lysozyme An enzyme that breaks down components of bacterial cell walls (called peptidoglycans).

Macronutrients The chemical constituents of food required in large amounts to sustain life:
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.

Macrophages Immune cells that reside in connective tissues and organs of the body and act as
sentinels. They are also phagocytes.

Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) A set of proteins on every cell’s surface that displays
fragments of proteins from the inside of the cell, including fragments of normal proteins and fragments
from invading microorganisms. A way for the cell to raise a red flag if it gets infected.

Markers of Inflammation Inflammation cannot be measured directly, so in studies, it is inferred by
measuring markers such as C-reactive protein and certain proinflammatory cytokines.

M Cell A special cell type in the gut barrier responsible for testing the environment inside the gut and
reporting any pathogens or other problematic substances to the immune system.

Mediator A compound that stimulates or activates functions in other cells, acting like a signal or a
directive.

Membrane Receptor A specialized type of protein embedded in the cell membrane that enables
communication between the cell and the outside world. Molecules that serve as signals (for example,
hormones, neurotransmitters, cytokines, and paracrines) attach to the receptor, triggering changes in
the function of the cell. The terms membrane receptor, cell surface receptor , and transmembrane
receptor are used interchangeably.

Memory Cell A subtype of B or T cells produced when the body is defending itself from a pathogen
that is responsible for “remembering” that specific pathogen. Memory cells protect against future
infections by making an accelerated response to that antigen if they encounter it again.

Methylation A type of post-translational modification in which a methyl group is added to certain
amino acids (lysine or arginine). Adding this methyl group may activate or deactivate a protein
(depending on the protein) and also affect its ability to bind to a receptor or substrate (like an on-off
switch).

Methyl Cycle A complex system in which methyl groups are transported throughout and recycled by
the body. The terms methyl cycle and methylation cycle are used interchangeably.

Methyl Group A molecule derived from methane, composed of one carbon atom and three hydrogen
atoms (CH3), used to methylate proteins.

MHC An acronym for major histocompatibility complex.

Micronutrient A chemical element or substance required in trace amounts but necessary to sustain
life. Among micronutrients are minerals, vitamins, and other organic compounds, such as
phytochemicals and antioxidants.

Mitochondria The organelles (typically found in large numbers in most cells) responsible for energy
production in the cell. Mitochondria use glucose and oxygen to produce energy (in the form of the
molecule adenine triphosphate, or ATP) and release carbon dioxide and water in the process.

Monocyte A type of white blood cell that is part of the innate immune system.

Monosaccharide A simple carbohydrate composed of a single sugar molecule.

Mucosal Barrier See Intestinal Barrier.

Mucous Membrane A lining or layer made up of mucus, which is secreted by specialized cells. The
terms mucous membrane, mucous layer, and mucosa are used interchangeably.

Natural Killer Cell A type of white blood cell—part of the innate immune system—recruited to the
site of infection specifically to destroy virally infected cells of the body. Similar to cytotoxic T cells,
but natural killer cells respond more quickly.

Neurotransmitter A chemical released by nerve cells to send signals to other nerve cells.

Neutrophil A type of granulocyte that is part of the innate immune system. Neutrophils are also
phagocytes.

Organelle A membrane-bound, specialized structure within a cell. There are many different types of
organelles, each with a specific function within the cell, akin to little organs.

Oxidant A highly chemically reactive molecule that contains oxygen. The terms oxidant, oxygen
radicals, and reactive oxygen species are used interchangeably. Oxidants are a type of free radical,
but not all free radicals are oxidants.

Oxidative Stress Stress on cells and tissues caused by an imbalance between the damage caused by
oxidants and the body’s ability to readily detoxify the chemicals produced by reactions with oxidants
and to repair the resulting damage.

Oxygen Radicals See Oxidant.

Paracrine A fat-based molecule that acts as a signal for communication between adjacent cells (from
cell to neighboring cell).

Pathogen A foreign organism that can make you sick. For example, a virus, bacterium, or parasite.

Pathogenesis The genesis or origin of a disease; that is, how the disease starts and develops.

Pathology Something abnormal or affected by disease. Also refers to the study of the causes and
effects of disease and the branch of medicine responsible for analyzing samples to evaluate the
presence of disease.

Peptide A short sequence of amino acids, like a miniprotein. Some proteins are composed of several
peptides, or polypeptides, bound together. A peptide typically has thirty or fewer amino acids, but
there is no firm cutoff point to differentiate between a peptide and a polypeptide or a small protein
(peptide and polypeptide are often used interchangeably). Some chains of five hundred amino acids
are considered peptides based on the fact that they combine with other peptides to create a protein
(such as an antibody).

Peristalsis The wavelike contraction and relaxation of the muscles of the intestine that pushes food
through the digestive tract. Also refers to this motion in connection with any other muscular tube in the
body.

Permeability The quantification of how permeable a substance is; that is, how easily it lets liquids or
gases pass through it.

Permeable Allowing liquids or gases to pass through.

Phagocytes Cells that engulf and destroy pathogens, akin to eating pathogens.

Phagocytosis The ingestion of a pathogen (like a bacterium) by phagocytes (amoebas do this, too).
When a phagocyte phagocytoses a pathogen, the process is called phagocytosis.

Plasma The fluid portion of blood that red and white blood cells are suspended in.

Polypeptide A longer sequence of amino acids than a peptide (typically 30–50 amino acids long).
Sometimes used interchangeably with peptide, since there is no firm cutoff point to differentiate
between a peptide, a polypeptide, and a short protein. For example, heavy chain, a polypeptide
component of antibodies, is between 450 and 550 amino acids long.

Polysaccharide A carbohydrate chain made up of many sugar molecules. For example, starch or
fiber.
Postprandial Occurring after a meal.

Post-translational Modifications A variety of modifications that can be made to proteins after they
are synthesized (that is, built by the protein factories in your cells), which affect the protein’s
function.

Prebiotics Nondigestible food ingredients (such as fiber) that promote the growth of beneficial
microorganisms in the intestines.

Primal Diet A Paleo diet in which high-quality dairy products are included; also called a lacto-
Paleo diet. Often considered synonymous with the Paleo diet.

Probiotics Beneficial microorganisms that live in the body (primarily within the gastrointestinal
tract).

Progenitor Cell A type of stem cell that can differentiate into a few different types of cells. For
example, a thymocyte is a progenitor cell that can differentiate into one of the types of T cells.

Proinflammatory Promoting or stimulating inflammation.

Prolamin A type of lectin. Prolamins are plant storage proteins found in the seeds of cereal grains
that are high in the amino acid proline.

Proliferation The reproduction or multiplication of cells via cell division.

Prostaglandin A group of hormonelike molecules that act as autocrines and paracrines.
Prostaglandins figure prominently in blood clotting, pain signaling, cell growth, kidney function,
stomach-acid secretion, and inflammation through their actions as signaling molecules.

Proteases Enzymes that break apart, or lyse, proteins. The terms protease and proteolytic enzyme
are used interchangeably.

Proteoglycans Glycoproteins that have a negative electric charge. An important component of the gut
glycocalyx layer.

Proteolysis The process of breaking apart, or lysing, a protein.

Proteolytic Enzymes See Proteases.

Reactive Oxygen Species See Oxidant.

Receptor A specialized type of protein that takes part in communication between a cell and the
outside world or within a cell. Molecules that serve as signals (such as hormones, neurotransmitters,
cytokines, autocrines, and paracrines) attach to the receptor, triggering changes in the function of the
cell. Membrane receptors are a type of receptor.
Recruitment The process by which white blood cells leave blood vessels and enter the tissue. This
is a complex, multistep process that involves the interactions of many proteins, including proteins on
the surface of the white blood cells and the cells that line the blood vessels, as well as cytokines.

Regulatory T Cell A type of T cell that suppresses the activity of immune and inflammatory cells to
shut down immune response toward the end of an immune reaction (once the pathogen has been
eradicated).

Retrotranscytosis A type of transcytosis, or transport of small molecules from one side of a cell to
the other. In the case of retrotranscytosis, the transport is in the opposite direction of normal transport
for that specific molecule. For example, IgA antibodies normally transcytose from inside the body
into the gut as part of normal immune defenses. When antibodies are recycled back into the body, they
are transported across the cell in the opposite direction, and this is called retrotranscytosis. See also
Transcytosis.

Saponin A substance found in many plants that has detergentlike properties.

Semipermeable Allowing some liquids or gases to pass through, but not others.

Serum Similar to blood plasma, but with all substances involved in blood clotting removed.

Stem Cell A very important type of cell that has the ability to differentiate (mature) into many
different cell types. These are necessary in the body for normal cell turnover (where cells die and are
replaced with new cells), growth, and repair. A progenitor cell is a type of stem cell that can
differentiate into fewer different types of cells.

Steroid Hormone A class of hormones with a specific molecular structure (called a steroid
structure) that includes cortisol, estrogen, and testosterone.

Substrate A molecule that is acted upon by an enzyme.

T Cells White blood cells that activate B cells, activate inflammatory cells, kill infected cells, and
directly kill pathogens. T cells are one of two main cell types involved in the cellular adaptive
immune system.

Thromboxane A group of hormonelike molecules that act as autocrines and paracrines; important
regulators of blood clotting.

Thymocyte A type of progenitor cell that lives in the thymus gland. Thymocytes can differentiate into
the many types of T cells.

Thymus Gland A specialized organ of the immune system responsible for controlling the
differentiation and survival of T cells.

Tight Junction A specialized connection between two cells, formed by the knitting together of
special proteins. The tight junction holds cells tightly together but also helps cells divide their cell
membranes into regions (this is important for the function of barrier cells such as enterocytes).

Toll-Like Receptor A special type of membrane receptor in cells of the innate immune system
(especially macrophages and dendritic cells) that binds to proteins unique to microbes. Important for
initial recognition of a pathogen.

Transcytosis A type of transport of small molecules across a cell, required for innumerable and
diverse functions of the cell including absorption of nutrients across the intestinal barrier. Molecules
(such as proteins) are captured by the cell via endocytosis and expelled on the other side of the cell
via exocytosis.

Villi An important aspect of the structure of the small intestine. Intestinal villus refers to any one of
the small, finger-shaped outgrowths of the epithelial lining of the wall of the intestine, formed by
columns of cells, collectively called the intestinal villi.
Summary Guides
Foods to Avoid


   Grains: Barley, corn, durum, fonio, Job’s tears, kamut, millet, oats, rice, rye, sorghum, spelt, teff,
triticale, wheat (all varieties, including einkorn and semolina), and wild rice.

  Gluten: Barley, rye, and wheat, and foods derived from these ingredients. (See the table here for
hidden sources of gluten and commonly contaminated foods.)

 Pseudo-grains and grainlike substances: Amaranth, buckwheat, chia, and quinoa.

   Dairy: Butter, buttermilk, butter oil, cheese, cottage cheese, cream, milk, curds, dairy-protein
isolates, ghee, heavy cream, ice cream, kefir, sour cream, whey, whey-protein isolate, whipping
cream, and yogurt. (Cultured grass-fed ghee might be tolerated.)

  Legumes: Adzuki beans, black beans, black-eyed peas, butter beans, calico beans, cannellini
beans, chickpeas (aka garbanzo beans), fava beans (aka broad beans), Great Northern beans, green
beans, Italian beans, kidney beans, lentils, lima beans, mung beans, navy beans, pinto beans, peanuts,
peas, runner beans, split peas, and soybeans (including edamame, tofu, tempeh, other soy products,
and soy isolates, such as soy lecithin).

  Processed vegetable oils: Canola oil (rapeseed oil), corn oil, cottonseed oil, palm kernel oil,
peanut oil, safflower oil, sunflower oil, and soybean oil.

   Processed food chemicals and ingredients: Acrylamides, artificial food color, artificial and
natural flavors, autolyzed protein, brominated vegetable oil, emulsifiers (carrageenan, cellulose gum,
guar gum, lecithin, xanthan gum), hydrolyzed vegetable protein, monosodium glutamate, nitrates or
nitrites (naturally occurring are okay), olestra, phosphoric acid, propylene glycol, textured vegetable
protein, trans fats (partially hydrogenated vegetable oil, hydrogenated oil), yeast extract, and any
ingredient with a chemical name that you don’t recognize.

  Added sugars: Agave, agave nectar, barley malt, barley malt syrup, beet sugar, brown rice syrup,
brown sugar, cane crystals, cane juice, cane sugar, caramel, coconut sugar, corn sweetener, corn
syrup, corn syrup solids, crystalline fructose, date sugar, dehydrated cane juice, demerara sugar,
dextrin, dextrose, diastatic malt, evaporated cane juice, fructose, fruit juice, fruit juice concentrate,
galactose, glucose, glucose solids, golden syrup, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, invert sugar, inulin,
jaggery, lactose, malt syrup, maltodextrin, maltose, maple syrup, molasses, monk fruit (luo han guo),
muscovado sugar, palm sugar, panela, panocha, rapadura, raw cane sugar, raw sugar, refined sugar,
rice bran syrup, rice syrup, saccharose, sorghum syrup, sucanat, sucrose, sugar, syrup, treacle,
turbinado sugar, and yacon syrup. (For a discussion on Paleo Approach–friendly treats, see here.)

  Sugar alcohols: Erythritol, mannitol, sorbitol, and xylitol. (Naturally occurring sugar alcohols
found in whole foods like fruit are OK.)
  Nonnutritive Sweeteners: Acesulfame potassium, aspartame, neotame, saccharin, stevia, and
sucralose.

  Nuts and nut oils: Almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, chestnuts, hazelnuts, macadamia nuts, pecans,
pine nuts, pistachios, and walnuts, and any flours, butters, oils, or other products derived from these
nuts. (Coconut is an exception; see here.)

   Seeds and seed oils: Chia, flax, hemp seeds, poppy, pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower, and any
flours, butters, oils, or other products derived from them.

  Nightshades and spices derived from nightshades: Ashwagandha, bell peppers (aka sweet
peppers), cayenne pepper, cape gooseberries (ground cherries, not to be confused with regular
cherries, which are OK), eggplant, garden huckleberries (not to be confused with regular
huckleberries, which are OK), goji berries (aka wolfberries), hot peppers (chili peppers and chili-
based spices), naranjillas, paprika, pepinos, pimentos, potatoes (sweet potatoes are OK), tamarillos,
tomatillos, and tomatoes. (Note: Some curry powders have nightshade ingredients.)

  Spices derived from seeds (small amounts might be tolerated): Anise, annatto, black caraway
(Russian caraway, black cumin), celery seed, coriander, cumin, dill, fennel, fenugreek, mustard, and
nutmeg. (For more information on spices, see here.)

 Eggs: Although egg yolks might be tolerated.

 Alcohol: Although an occasional drink after remission might be tolerated.

 Coffee: Although an occasional cup might be tolerated.

 High-glycemic-load foods

Foods to Consume in Moderation


Green and black tea
Fructose: Aim for between ten and twenty grams of fructose per day.
Salt: Use pink or gray salt because it is rich in trace minerals.
Moderate-glycemic-load vegetables and fruits



    How to Avoid Added and Refined Sugars

When you are reading food labels, it is helpful to know how to decipher which ingredients are
sugar. While most sugars are refined, some are unrefined (which typically means that the sugar
retains some minerals). It is also common for many manufactured products to contain more than
one form of sugar. The following label ingredients are all forms of sugar:
• agave                    • agave nectar            • barley malt
• barley malt syrup        • beet sugar              • brown rice syrup
• brown sugar              • cane crystals           • cane juice
• cane sugar               • caramel                 • coconut sugar
• corn sweetener           • corn syrup              • corn syrup solids
• crystalline fructose     • date sugar              • dehydrated cane juice
• demerara sugar           • dextrin                 • dextrose
• diastatic malt           • evaporated cane juice • fructose
• fruit juice              • fruit juice concentrate • galactose
• glucose                  • glucose solids          • golden syrup
• high-fructose corn syrup • honey                   • inulin
• invert sugar             • jaggery                 • lactose
• maltodextrin             • maltose                 • malt syrup
• maple syrup              • molasses                • monk fruit (luo han guo)
• muscovado sugar          • palm sugar              • panela
• panocha                  • rapadura                • raw cane sugar
• raw sugar                • refined sugar           • rice bran syrup
• rice syrup               • saccharose              • sorghum
• sorghum syrup            • sucanat                 • sucrose
• sugar                    • syrup                   • treacle
• turbinado sugar          • yacon syrup



    How to Avoid Wheat/Gluten


Avoiding gluten can take some effort. Ingredients derived from wheat and other gluten-
containing grains can be found in the vast array of packaged and manufactured foods, but also
in some ingredients not normally considered to be processed foods. The following list includes
some of these hidden—and not-so-hidden—sources of gluten.
                                                                   •       bacon        (check
 • Asian rice paper          • atta flour
                                                                   ingredients)
 • barley                    • barley grass                        • barley malt
 • beer (unless gluten-free) • bleached or unbleached flour        • bran
 • bread flour               • breading                            • brewer’s yeast
 • bulgur                    • coating mixes                       • communion wafers
 • condiments                • couscous                            • croutons
• dinkle (spelt)              • durham                                     • einkorn
                                                                           • farro (called emmer
• emmer (durham wheat)        • farina
                                                                           wheat except in Italy)
                                                                           • fu (a dried form of
• food starch                 • french fries
                                                                           gluten)
                              • glue used on some envelopes, stamps, and
• gliadin                                                                • gluten
                              labels
• gluten peptides             • glutenin                                 • graham
• gravies                     • hydrolyzed wheat gluten                  • hydrolyzed wheat protein
• ice cream (may contain
flour as an anticrystallizing • imitation fish                               • kamut
agent)
• lunch meats                 • maida (Indian wheat flour)                   • malt
• malt vinegar                • marinades                                    • matzah (aka matso)
                              • nutritional and herbal supplements (may
• mir (a wheat and rye cross)                                                • oats
                              contain gluten)
• panko (bread crumbs)        • pilafs (containing orzo)
• prepared foods (often
                              • processed cereals                            • rye
contain gluten)
• salad dressings             • sauces                                       • seitan
                                                                             •     some     medications
• self-basting poultry        • semolina                                     (prescription or over the
                                                                             counter)
                              • soy or rice drinks (may have barley malt
                                                                             • soy sauce (except for a
• soup bases and bouillon     or     malt      enzymes       used     during
                                                                             wheat-free version)
                              manufacturing)
                              • spice mixtures (often contain wheat as an
• spelt                                                                      • starch
                              anticaking agent, filler, or thickening agent)
• stuffings                   • syrups                                       • thickeners
• triticale                   • wheat                                        • wheat bran
• wheat germ                  • wheat grass                                  • wheat starch

Common Sources of Gluten/Wheat Contamination:
                                                                 • toasters, grills, pans, cutting
• millet, white rice flour, • foods sold in bulk (often
                                                                 boards, utensils, appliances, and
buckwheat flour, sorghum flour, contaminated by scoops used
                                                                 oils that were used for preparing
and soy flour                   in other bins and by flour dust)
                                                                 foods containing gluten
                                • knives double-dipped into
                                                                 • powder coating inside rubber
                                food spreads after spreading
• flour dust                                                     gloves (may be derived from
                                on bread (can leave gluten-
                                                                 wheat)
                                containing crumbs)
• art supplies, including paints, • personal-care products (like
clay, glue, and play dough; gluten shampoo) and household • some waxes or resins on fruit
can be transferred to the mouth if products may be transferred to and vegetables
hands aren’t washed                the lips and ingested



    How to Avoid Soy


Soy is another ingredient that has permeated the food supply. Soy lecithin and soy protein are
especially common ingredients to find in packaged goods. The following list includes foods that
are derived from soy:
                                                          • chocolate (soy lecithin may be used in
• bean curd                      • bean sprouts
                                                          manufacturing)
                                 • hydrolyzed soy protein
• edamame (fresh soybeans)                                • kinako
                                 (HSP)
• miso (fermented soybean paste) • mono- and diglycerides • MSG (monosodium glutamate)
• natto                          • nimame                 • okara
• shoyu                          • soy albumin            • soy cheese
• soy fiber                      • soy flour              • soy grits
• soy ice cream                  • soy lecithin           • soy meal
• soy milk                       • soy nuts               • soy pasta
• soy protein (concentrate,
                                 • soy sauce              • soy sprouts
hydrolyzed, isolate)
• soy yogurt                     • soya                   • soybean (curds, granules)
• soybean oil                    • tamari                 • tempeh
                                 • textured vegetable
• teriyaki sauce                                          • tofu (dofu, kori-dofu)
                                 protein (TVP)
• yuba


Potentially
Cross-Contaminated
Foods Must Be Labeled
• “may contain • “produced on shared equipment with • “produced in a facility that also processes
soy”           soy”                                 soy”


Products That Commonly Contain Soy
• waxes or horticultural •      Asian      cuisine
oils on fruits            (Chinese,      Japanese, • baked goods
                          Korean, Thai)
• baking mixes            • bouillon cubes         • candy
                          • chicken (raw or
• cereal                  cooked) processed with • chicken broth
                          chicken broth
                          • energy bars/nutrition • imitation dairy foods, such as soy milks, vegan
• deli meats
                          bars                     cheese, and vegan ice cream
• infant formula          • margarine              • mayonnaise
• meat products with
                          • nutrition supplements
fillers    (for  example,                          • peanut butter and peanut butter substitutes
                          (vitamins)
burgers or sausages)
• protein powders         • sauces and gravies     • smoothies
                                                   • vegetarian meat substitutes (veggie burgers,
• soups                   • vegetable broth        imitation chicken patties, imitation lunch meats,
                                                   imitation bacon bits)
    How to Avoid Corn


Ingredients derived from corn can be found in the vast majority of packaged and manufactured
foods. If you are very sensitive to corn-derived products, avoiding these pervasive ingredients
can be overwhelming. However, avoiding processed foods in general will make a huge
difference. You may or may not need to go to the extent of avoiding all traces of corn-derived
ingredients (in medications, for example); however, being aware of where corn exposure may
be sneaking into your life will help you identify whether or not it is a problem. The following list
includes some hidden—and not-so-hidden—sources of corn.


Ingredients Derived from Corn
• acetic acid           • alcohol                           • alpha tocopherol
• artificial flavorings • artificial sweeteners             • ascorbates
• ascorbic acid         • aspartame                         • astaxanthin
• baking powder         • barley malt                       • bleached flour
• blended sugar         • brown sugar                       • calcium citrate
• calcium fumarate      • calcium gluconate                 • calcium lactate
• calcium magnesium
                        • calcium stearate                  • calcium stearoyl lactylate
acetate (CMA)
• caramel and caramel
                        • carboxymethylcellulose sodium     • cellulose, microcrystalline
color
• cellulose, powdered • cetearyl glucoside               • choline chloride
• citric acid            • citrus cloud emulsion (CCS)   • cocoglycerides
• confectioners’ sugar • corn oil                        • corn sweetener
• corn sugar             • corn syrup                    • corn syrup solids
• cornmeal               • cornstarch                    • crosscarmellose sodium
• crystalline dextrose • crystalline fructose            • cyclodextrin
•      datum      (dough
                         • decyl glucoside               • decyl polyglucose
conditioner)
                         • dextrose (also found in IV • dextrose anything (such as
• dextrin
                         solutions)                      monohydrate or anhydrous)
• d-Gluconic acid        • distilled white vinegar       • drying agent
• erythorbic acid        • erythritol                    • ethanol
• Ethocel 20             • ethylcellulose                • ethyl acetate
• ethyl alcohol          • ethyl lactate                 • ethyl maltol
• ethylene               • Fibersol-2                    • flavorings
• food starch            • fructose                      • fruit juice concentrate
• fumaric acid           • germ/germ meal                • gluconate
• gluconic acid          • glucono delta-lactone         • gluconolactone
                                                         • glucose syrup (also found in IV
• glucosamine            • glucose
                                                         solutions)
• glutamate              • gluten                        • gluten feed/meal
• glycerides             • glycerin                      • glycerol
• golden syrup           • grits                         • hominy
• honey                  • hydrolyzed corn               • hydrolyzed corn protein
• hydrolyzed vegetable                                   • hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
                         • hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
protein                                                  pthalate (HPMCP)
• inositol               • invert syrup or sugar
• lactate                • lactic acid                   • lauryl glucoside
• lecithin               • linoleic acid
• lysine                 • magnesium fumarate            • maize
• malic acid             • malonic acid                  • malt syrup from corn
• malt, malt extract     • maltitol                      • maltodextrin
• maltol                 • maltose                       • mannitol
• margarine              • methyl gluceth                • methyl glucose
• methyl glucoside       • methylcellulose               • modified cellulose gum
                                                         • molasses (corn syrup may be
• modified cornstarch • modified food starch
                                                         present; check label)
•        mono-       and
                         • monosodium glutamate (MSG)    • monostearate
diglycerides
• natural flavorings    • olestra/Olean                     • polenta
                                                            • polysorbates (e.g., Polysorbate
• polydextrose          • polylactic acid (PLA)
                                                            80)
• polyvinyl acetate       • potassium citrate               • potassium fumarate
• potassium gluconate • powdered sugar                      • pregelatinized starch
• propionic acid          • propylene glycol                • saccharin
• salt (iodized)          • semolina (unless from wheat)    • simethicone
•                  sodium
                          • sodium citrate                  • sodium erythorbate
carboxymethylcellulose
• sodium fumarate         • sodium lactate                  • sodium starch glycolate
• sodium stearoyl
                          • sorbate                         • sorbic acid
fumarate
• sorbitan                • sorbitan monooleate             • sorbitan trioleate
                          • sorghum (syrup and/or grain may
• sorbitol                                                  • Splenda (artificial sweetener)
                          be mixed with corn)
• starch                  • stearic acid                    • stearoyls
• Sucralose (artificial                                                                         •
                          • sucrose                         • sugar
sweetener)                                                                                      talc
• threonine               • tocopherol (vitamin E)          • treacle
• triethyl citrate        • unmodified starch               • vanilla, natural flavoring
• vanilla, pure or
                          • vanillin                        • vinegar, distilled white
extract
• vinyl acetate           • vitamin C                       • vitamin E
• vitamin supplements • xanthan gum                         • xylitol
• yeast                   • zea mays                        • zein
Foods to Include


All the foods listed here are great to include in your diet. Those that should be consumed in
moderation have page numbers beside them for easy reference.


     Red Meat

• antelope • bear                  • beaver
• beef     • bison (aka buffalo)   • boar
• camel • caribou                  • deer
• elk      • goat                  • hare
• horse • kangaroo                 • lamb
• moose • mutton                   • pork
• rabbit • sea lion                • seal
• whale* • essentially, any mammal



*Some species of whale may have high mercury content (see here).



     Fish

• anchovy       • Arctic char • Atlantic croaker
• barcheek goby • bass        • bonito
• bream         • brill       • brisling
• carp          • catfish     • cod
• common dab • conger         • crappie
• croaker       • drum        • eel
• fera          • filefish    • gar
• haddock       • hake        • halibut
• herring       • John Dory • king mackerel*
• lamprey       • ling        • loach
• mackerel      • mahi-mahi • marlin*
• milkfish      • minnow      • monkfish
• pandora       • perch       • plaice
• pollock            • sailfish*      • salmon
• sardine            • shad           • shark*
• sheepshead         • silverside     • smelt
• snakehead          • snapper        • sole
• swordfish*         • tarpin*        • tilapia
• tilefish*          • trout          • tub gurnard
• tuna               • turbot         • walleye
• whiting



*Some species of fish may have high mercury content (see here).



     Poultry

• chicken • dove                     • duck
• emu        • goose                 • grouse
• guinea hen • ostrich               • partridge
• pheasant • pigeon                  • quail
• turkey     • essentially, any bird


     Amphibians and Reptiles

• crocodile • frog • snake
• turtle


     Shellfish

• abalone     • clams • cockles
• conch       • crab • crawfish
• cuttlefish • limpets • lobster
• mussels     • octopus • oysters
• periwinkles • prawns • scallops
• shrimp      • snails • squid
• whelks
    Other Seafood

• anemones      • caviar and roe • jellyfish
• sea cucumbers • sea urchins    • sea squirts
• starfish


    Offal

                                                                        • certain bones (marrow and
• blood                             • brain
                                                                        bone broth)
• chitterlings and natural casings • fats and other trimmings (tallow
                                                                      • fries (testicles)
(intestines)                       and lard)
• head meat (cheek or jowl)        • heart                            • kidney
• lips                             • liver                            • melt (spleen)
                                   • sweetbreads (thymus gland or
• rinds (skin)                                                        • tail
                                   pancreas)
• tongue                           • tripe (stomach)


    Glycine-Rich Foods

                      • cheek and
• bone broth                      • chuck roast
                      jowl
•            collagen             • joint tissue and meat off the bone (trotters, duck feet, chicken
                      • gelatin
supplements                       wings)
                      • skin and
• most offal
                      rinds


    Leafy Greens and Salad Veggies

• amaranth greens            • artichoke              • arugula
• asparagus                  • beet greens            • bok choy
• borage greens              • broccoli               • broccoli rabe
• Brussels sprouts           • cabbage                • canola leaves
• capers                     • cardoon                • carrot tops
• cat’s ear                  • cauliflower           • celery
• celtuce                    • Ceylon spinach        • chickweed
• chicory                    • Chinese mallow        • chrysanthemum leaves
• collard greens             • cress                 • dandelion
• endive                     • fat hen               • fiddleheads
• florence fennel            • fluted pumpkin leaves
• Good King Henry            • greater plantain      • kohlrabi greens
• kai-lan (Chinese broccoli) • kale                  • komatsuna
• lagos bologi               • lamb’s lettuce        • land cress
• lettuce                    • lizard’s tail         • melokhia
• mizuna                     • mustard greens        • napa cabbage
• New Zealand spinach        • nopal                 • orache
• pea leaves                 • poke                  • Prussian asparagus
• radicchio                  • samphire              • sculpit (stridolo)
• sea beet                   • sea kale              • sorrel
• spinach                    • squash blossoms       • summer purslane
• sweet potato greens        • Swiss chard           • tatsoi
• turnip greens              • watercress            • water spinach
• winter purslane


    Alliums

• abusgata                • chives      • elephant garlic
• garlic                  • kurrat      • leek
• onion                   • pearl onion • potato onion
• spring onion (scallion) • shallot     • tree onion
• wild leek


    Sea Vegetables

• aonori      • arame       • carola
• dabberlocks • dulse       • hijiki
• kombu       • laver       • mozuku
• nori        • ogonori • sea grape
• sea kale    • sea lettuce • wakame
    Vegetables That Are Actually Fruit

• avocado                       • bitter melon (aka bitter gourd) • chayote
• cucumber                      • ivy gourd                       • loofa
• okra (technically a seed pod) • olives                          • plantain
• pumpkin                       • squash                          • tinda
• West Indian gherkin           • winter melon                    • zucchini


    Roots, Tubers, and Bulb Vegetables

• arracacha          • arrowroot           • bamboo shoot (see here)
• beet root          • broadleaf arrowhead • burdock
• camas              • canna               • carrot
• cassava (see here) • celeriac            • Chinese artichoke
• daikon             • earthnut pea        • elephant foot yam
• ensete             • ginger              • Hamburg parsley
• horseradish        • Jerusalem artichoke • jicama
• kohlrabi           • lotus root          • mashua
• parsnip            • pignut              • prairie turnip
• radish             • rutabaga            • salsify
• scorzonera         • skirret             • swede
• sweet potato       • taro                • ti
• tigernut           • turnip              • ulluco
• wasabi             • water caltrop       • water chestnut
• yacón              • yam


    Berries

• açaí        • bearberry       • bilberry
• blackberry • blueberry        • cloudberry
• crowberry • cranberry         • currant
• elderberry • falberry         • gooseberry
• grapes      • hackberry       • huckleberry
• lingonberry • loganberry      • muscadines
• mulberry • nannyberry         • Oregon grape
• raspberry • salmonberry • sea buckthorn
• strawberry • strawberry tree • thimbleberry
• wineberry


    Rosaceae Family

• apple        • apricot   • cherry
• chokeberry • chokecherry • crabapple
• greengage • hawthorn • loquat
• medlar       • nectarine • peach
• pear         • plum      • quince
• rose hip     • rowan     • serviceberry
• service tree • shipova


    Melons

• canary melon                    • cantaloupe                   • casaba
• charantais                      • Christmas melon              • crenshaw
• derishi                         • galia                        • honeydew
• horned melon                    • melonpear (aka pepino melon) • muskmelon
• net melon                       • ogen melon                   • Persian melon
• Russian melon (aka Uzbek melon) • sharlyn                      • sweet melon
• watermelon                      • wax melon                    • xigua


    Citrus Fruits

• amanatsu               • blood orange               • Buddha’s hand
• cam sành               • citron                     • clementine
• fernandina             • grapefruit, many varieties • kaffir lime
• key lime               • kinnow                     • kiyomi
• kumquat                • lemon, many varieties      • lime, many varieties
• limetta                • mandarin                   • Meyer lemon
• orange, many varieties • orangelo                   • oroblanco
• pomelo                 • pompia                     • ponkan
•• rangpur
   tangelo              •• shonan  gold
                           tangerine                 •• sudachi
                                                        tangor
 • ugli fruit            • yuzu


     Tropical and Subtropical Fruits

• abiu            • acerola               • ackee
• African moringa • ambarella             • babaco
• banana          • biribi
• camucamu
• canistel        • ceriman               • chayote
• cherimoya       • coco plum             • coconut (see here)
• custard apple • date                    • dragonfruit
• durian          • fig, many varieties • gambooge
• granadilla      • guava, many varieties • guavaberry
• guanabana       • ilama                 • jackfruit
• jujube          • karonda               • kiwi
• korlan          • kumquat               • longan
• loquat          • lychee                • mamey sapote
• mango           • mangosteen            • maypop
• medlar          • nance                 • papaya
• passionfruit    • pawpaw                • peanut butter fruit
• persimmon       • pineapple             • plantain
• pomegranate     • pulasan               • quince
• rambutan        • riberry               • rose apple
• safou           • salak                 • santol
• soursop         • star apple            • star fruit (carambola)
• sugar apple     • tamarind              • ugni
• vanilla         • wampee


     Probiotic Foods

• beet and other vegetable kvasses • coconut milk kefir             • kombucha
• raw, unpasteurized, lactofermented •      raw,     unpasteurized, •      raw,      unpasteurized,
vegetables (kimchi, beets, carrots, lactofermented fruits (green lactofermented         condiments
pickles)                             papaya, chutneys)              (relishes, salsas)
• raw, unpasteurized sauerkraut      • water kefir
    Good Fats

                                                            • coconut oil (typically extra-virgin,
• avocado oil (cold-
                     • bacon fat                            expeller-pressed, but also naturally
pressed)
                                                            refined)
• lard (rendered fat • leaf lard (rendered fat from around
from the backs of pigs’ kidneys and other internal • macadamia nut oil (see here)
pigs)                organs)
• olive oil, extra-                                        • palm oil (not to be confused with palm
                     • olive oil, virgin
virgin                                                     kernel oil)
                                                           • poultry fat (typically duck, goose, or
• palm shortening    • pan drippings
                                                           emu)
                     • salo (fat rendered from cured slabs • schmaltz (rendered chicken or goose
• red palm oil
                     of pork fatback)                      fat)
• strutto (clarified • tallow (rendered fat from beef,
                                                           • walnut oil (see here)
pork fat)            lamb, or mutton)


    Safe Herbs and Spices

• asafetida (check ingredients) • balm (see here)     • basil leaf (sweet)
• bay leaf                      • chamomile           • chervil
                                • cilantro (coriander
• chives                                              • cinnamon
                                leaf)
• cloves                        • dill weed           • fennel leaf
                                                      • horseradish (check ingredients for
• garlic                        • ginger
                                                      horseradish sauce)
                                • lemon balm (see
• lavender                                            • mace
                                here)
• marjoram leaf                 • onion powder        • oregano leaf
• parsley                       • peppermint          • rosemary
• saffron                       • sage                • salt (Himalayan pink salt or Celtic sea salt)
• savory leaf                   • spearmint           • tarragon
• thyme                         • turmeric (see here) • vanilla extract (if alcohol is cooked off)
• vanilla powder (check
ingredients)


    Beverages
                                                                     • coconut milk (emulsifier-
• beet and other vegetable kvasses • carbonated or sparkling water
                                                                     free)
• coconut milk kefir             • coconut water                     • homemade spa water
• kombucha                       • lemon or lime juice               • soda water
• tea, green and black (hot; see • tea, herbal (hot or cold; see
here)                            here)
• vegetable (green) juices (see
                                 • water
here)


    Stems, Flowers, and Flower Bud Vegetables

• artichoke          • asparagus                           • broccoli
• capers             • cardoon                             • cauliflower
• celery             • fennel                              • nopal
• Prussian asparagus • rhubarb (only the stems are edible) • squash blossoms


    Pantry Items and Flavoring Ingredients

                                      • anchovies or anchovy
• agar agar                                                     • apple cider vinegar
                                      paste (check ingredients)
• arrowroot powder                    • baking soda             • balsamic vinegar
                                      • carob powder (see • coconut aminos (a great soy sauce
• capers
                                      here)                     substitute)
• coconut butter (creamed coconut, • coconut cream (see
                                                                • coconut flour (see here)
coconut cream concentrate; see here) here)
• coconut milk (see here)             • coconut water vinegar • cream of tartar
• fish sauce (check ingredients)      • gelatin                 • green banana flour
• honey, molasses, and maple syrup                              • plantain flour (check ingredients:
                                      • kuzu starch
(see here)                                                      may be mixed with potato starch)
                                                                • tapioca starch (caution: common
• pomegranate molasses (see here)     • red wine vinegar
                                                                sensitivity)
• truffle oil (made with extra-virgin • truffle salt (check
                                                                • unrefined cane sugars (see here)
olive oil; check ingredients)         ingredients)
• water chestnut flour
Selenium Health Benefit Values of Fish and Shellfish

The selenium health benefit value (Se-HBV) is essentially a measure of the ratio of selenium to
methylmercury in each fish. If the number is greater than zero, the fish has more selenium than
mercury and is safe to consume. If the number is less than zero, the fish contains higher levels
of mercury than selenium and should be avoided.




Fresh Fish and Shellfish
Albacore                 45.4
Anchovy                  8.0
Anglerfish               6.0
Bigeye                   48.6
Blue marlin              34.1
Blue shark               -1.0
Blue whiting             1.0
Bluefish                 2.5
Cat shark                -12.0
Chilean sea bass         7.0
Clam                     87.0
Cod                      11.5
Common sole              25.0
Croaker                  10.5
Cuttlefish               17.0
Escolar                  8.3
European hake            7.0
European sea bass        1.0
Flounder                 5.3
Gilt-head bream          -1.0
Grouper                  3.4
Hake                     8.0
Mackerel                 73.0
Mahi-mahi                78.4
Mako shark               -11.1
Megrim                   7.0
Mussel                   >1000
Opah
Orange roughy             5.9
                          2.3
Pangasius                 >1000
Perch                     3.0
Porgy                     24.0
Red mullet                0.0
Red snapper               8.8
Salmon (Norway)           >1000
Salmon (USA)              10.1
Sardine                   74.0
Scad                      36.0
Scallops                  0.5
Shrimp (Spain)            1.0
Shrimp (large; USA)       13.3
Shrimp (small; USA)       4.4
Sickle pomfret            44.4
Skipjack                  232.7
Spearfish                 71.0
Squid                     >1000
Striped marlin            118.3
Swordfish (Spain)         13.0
Swordfish (USA)*          -0.1
Thresher shark            2.5
Tuna (Spain)              21.0
Tuna (USA)                4.9
Wahoo                     76.2
Walleye pollock           0.9
Whiting                   62.5
Yellowfin (USA, Atlantic) 2.0
Yellowfin (USA, Pacific) 201.7
*Value averaged.




Canned Fish and Shellfish
Anchovy            45.0
Clam               >1000
Cockle             2.0
Frigate         >1000
Mackerel        45.0
Mussel          >1000
Octopus         >1000
Sardine         >1000
Small sardine >1000
Squid           >1000
Tuna (albacore) >1000
Tuna (gourmet) 43.8
Tuna (light)    20.4
Tuna (white) 5.7




Frozen Seafood
Codfish     >1000
Common sole >1000
Hake        7
Prawn       96
Shrimp      3
Squid       >1000




Scientists are just starting to understand the variability of the selenium health benefit value
within a species of fish or shellfish and why some types of fish naturally have higher values than
others (variability is due to the type of fish, size/age of the fish, geographic location and
migration routes, and exact diet of the fish). Also note that selenium levels have not been
measured in several species known to have high mercury, like tilefish and king mackerel.
However, the take-home message is that most fish have positive selenium health benefit values,
reflecting higher selenium than mercury levels, and are therefore safe to consume.

Data compiled from:


    Burger, J. and Gochfeld, M., Selenium and mercury molar ratios in commercial fish from New
    Jersey and Illinois: variation within species and relevance to risk communication. Food
    Chem Toxicol. 2013; 57: 235-45
    Kaneko, J. J. and Ralston, N. V. Selenium and mercury in pelagic fish in the central north
    Pacific near Hawaii. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2007; 119(3): 242-54
    Olmedo, P., et al., Determination of essential elements (copper, manganese, selenium and
     zinc) in fish and shellfish samples. Risk and nutritional assessment and mercury-selenium
     balance. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013; 62C: 299-307



Eating Seasonally

When Is What in Season*?
Spring
•apricots                     •artichokes     •arugula
•asparagus                    •beets          •broccoli
•cauliflower                  •chives         •collard greens
•fennel                       •fiddleheads    •garlic
•grapefruit                   •honeydew melon •jicama
•kale                         •kohlrabi       •limes
•mangoes                      •mustard greens •oranges
•pineapples                   •radicchio      •ramps
•rhubarb                      •sorrel         •spinach
•spring greens (baby lettuce) •spring onions  •strawberries
•Swiss chard                  •Vidalia onions •watercress



Fall
• apples        • arugula              • Asian pears
• bok choy      • broccoli             • Brussels sprouts
• cauliflower • cherimoya              • coconuts
• cranberries • daikon radish          • garlic
• ginger        • grapes               • guava
• huckleberries • Jerusalem artichokes • jicama
• kale          • kohlrabi             • kumquats
• passionfruit • pears                 • pomegranates
• pumpkin       • quince               • radicchio
• rutabagas     • sweet potatoes       • Swiss chard
• winter squash



Year-Round
• avocados • bananas     • beet greens
• broccolini • cabbage • carrots
• celery     • celery root • leeks
• lemons     • lettuce     • mushrooms
• onions     • papayas • parsnips
• shallots • turnips
*Based on North American harvests. Varies regionally.




Summer
• apricots      • arugula        • Asian pears
• beets         • black currants • blackberries
• blueberries   • boysenberries • broccoli
• cherries      • cucumbers      • figs
• garlic        • grapes         • kiwis
• limes         • loganberries • melons
• nectarines    • okra           • passionfruit
• peaches       • pineapples • plums
• radishes      • raspberries • strawberries
• summer squash • Swiss chard • zucchini



Winter
• apples         • bok choy       • Brussels sprouts
• cauliflower • cherimoya         • clementines
• coconuts       • collard greens • dates
• grapefruits    • jicama         • kale
• kiwis          • kohlrabi       • limes
• oranges        • passionfruit • pears
• persimmons • pineapples         • pomegranates
• pomelos        • red currants • rutabagas
• sweet potatoes • tangerines     • winter squash
• yams
Recommended Reading and Resources


There are plenty of other great resources out there, many of which have been mentioned during
relevant discussions in this book. For additional information, check out:


    The Paleo Diet, by Loren Cordain
    The Paleo Answer, by Loren Cordain
    Wheat Belly, by William Davis
    Perfect Health Diet, by Paul Jaminet and Shou-Ching Jaminet
    Your Personal Paleo Code, by Chris Kresser
    Practical Paleo, by Diane Sanfilippo
    The Primal Blueprint, by Mark Sisson
    The Primal Connection, by Mark Sisson
    The Wahls Protocol, by Terry Wahls (available March 2014)
    The Paleo Solution, by Robb Wolf




The best way to guarantee that a resource, program, book, e-book, or website is compatible with The
Paleo Approach is to look for this emblem. For a complete list of Paleo Approach–approved
resources, go to ThePaleoMom.com/TPA-Approved
References


Introduction
American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association. (aarda.org).
American Cancer Society. (cancer.org).
Cataldo, F. and Marino, V., Increased prevalence of autoimmune diseases in first-degree relatives
of patients with celiac disease, J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2003;36(4):470-473
Catassi, C., et al., Natural history of celiac disease autoimmunity in a USA cohort followed since
1974, Ann Med. 2010;42(7):530-8
Cooper, G. S. and Stroehla, B. C., The epidemiology of autoimmune diseases, Autoimmune Rev.
2003;2(3):119-25
Cooper, G. S., et al., Recent insights in the epidemiology of autoimmune diseases: improved
prevalence estimates and understanding of clustering of diseases, J Autoimmun. 2009;33(3-4):197-
207
Fairweather, D., et al., Sex differences in autoimmune disease from a pathological perspective, Am
J Pathol. 2008;173(3):600-609
Fasano, A., et al., Prevalence of celiac disease in at-risk and not-at-risk groups in the United
States: a large multicenter study. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163(3):286-292
Fluge, Ø., et al., Benefit from B-lymphocyte depletion using the Anti-CD20 antibody rituximab in
chronic fatigue syndrome. A double-blind and placebo-controlled study , PLoS One.
2011;62(10):e26358
Heidenreich, P. A., et al., Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in the United States: a
policy statement from the American Heart Association, Circulation. 2011;123:933-944
Kurtzke, J. F., Multiple sclerosis in time and space: geographic clues to cause, J Neurovirol.
2000;6(Suppl 2):S134-S140
Lohi, S., et al. Increasing prevalence of coeliac disease over time. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2007;26(9):1217-25
Marshall Protocol Knowledge Base. (mpkb.org).
Nakazawa, D. The Autoimmune Epidemic. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2008
Palace, J., Epilepsy: an autoimmune disease?, J. Neurol. Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:711-714
Prahalad, S., et al., Increased prevalence of familial autoimmunity in simplex and multiplex
families with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;46:1851-1856
Rose, N. R. Autoimmunity in coxsackievirus infection. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2008;323:293-
314
Siegel, C. A., et al., Risk of lymphoma associated with combination anti-tumor necrosis factor and
immunomodulator therapy for the treatment of Crohn’s disease: a meta-analysis . Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;7(8):874-81
Staines, D. R., Is fibromyalgia an autoimmune disorder of endogenous vasoactive neuropeptides?,
Med Hypotheses. 2004;62(5):665-9
Steiman, A. J., et al., Non-biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) improve
pain in inflammatory arthritis (IA): a systematic literature review of randomized controlled trials,
Rheumatol Int. 2013;33(5):1105-20
Teufel, A., et al., Concurrent autoimmune diseases in patients with autoimmune hepatitis, J Clin
Gastroenterol. 2010;44(3):208-13
Zwolińska-Wcisło, M., et al., Coeliac disease and other autoimmunological disorders coexistance,
Przegl Lek. 2009;66(7):370-2

Chapter 1:
The Causes of Autoimmune Disease
Abreu, M. T., Toll-like receptor signaling in the intestinal epithelium: how bacterial recognition
shapes intestinal function, Nat Rev Immunol. 2010;10:131-144
Alberts, B., et al., Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th edition. New York: Garland Science, 2002
Al-Khatib, K., and Lin, H. C., et al., Immune activation and gut microbes in irritable bowel
syndrome, Gut Liver. 2009;3(1):14-9
Atladóttir, H. O., et al., Association of family history of autoimmune diseases and autism spectrum
disorders, Pediatrics. 2009;124(2):687-94
Amino, N., et al., Possible induction of Graves’ disease and painless thyroiditis by gonadotropin-
releasing hormone analogues, Thyroid. 2003;13(8):815-8
Ascherio, A. and Munger, K. L., Epstein-Barr virus infection and multiple sclerosis: a review, J
Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2010;5(3):271-7
Assimakopoulos, S. F., et al., Enterocytes’ tight junctions: from molecules to diseases , World J
Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2011;2(6):123-137
Becklund, B. R., et al., UV radiation suppresses experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
independent of vitamin D production, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;107(14):6418-23
Benson, A., et al., Gut commensal bacteria direct a protective immune response against
Toxoplasma gondii, Cell Host Microbe. 2009;6(2):187-196
Beretich, B. D. and Beretich, T. M., Explaining multiple sclerosis prevalence by ultraviolet
exposure: a geospatial analysis, Mult Scler. 2009;15(8):891-8
Berglin, E., et al., Influence of female hormonal factors, in relation to autoantibodies and genetic
markers, on the development of rheumatoid arthritis in northern Sweden: a case-control study,
Scand J Rheumatol. 2010;39(6):454-60
Bergman, M. P., et al., Helicobacter pylori modulates the T helper cell 1/T helper cell 2 balance
through phase-variable interaction between lipopolysaccharide and DC-SIGN, J Exp Med.
2004;200(8):979-90
Bigazzi, P. E., Autoimmunity and heavy metals, Lupus. 1994;3(6):449-53
Bigazzi, P. E., Metals and kidney autoimmunity, Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107(Suppl 5):753-
65
Brix, T. H., et al., Evidence for a major role of heredity in Graves’ disease: a population-based
study of two Danish twin cohorts. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86:930-4
Brustolin, S., et al., Genetics of homocysteine metabolism and associated disorders, Braz J Med
Biol Res. 2010;43(1):1-7
Cadwell, K., et al., Virus-plus-susceptibility gene interaction determines Crohn’s disease gene
Atg16L1 phenotypes in intestine, Cell. 2010;141(7):1135-45
Carrier, Y., et al., Th3 cells in peripheral tolerance. I. Induction of Foxp3-positive regulatory T
cells by Th3 cells derived from TGF-beta T cell-transgenic mice, J Immunol. 2007;178(1):179-85
Carroll, M. E., et al., Giardiasis and uveitis, Arch Ophthalmol. 1961;65,775-778
Carvalho, F. A., et al., Toll-like receptor-gut microbiota interactions: perturb at your own risk! ,
Annu Rev Physiol. 2012;74:177-98
Chambers, E. S. and Hawrylowicz, C. M.,The impact of vitamin D on regulatory T cells, Curr
Allergy Asthma Rep. 2011;11(1):29-36
Chighizola, C. and Meroni, P. L., The role of environmental estrogens and autoimmunity ,
Autoimmun Rev. 2012;11(6-7):A493-501
Clowse, M. E., Managing contraception and pregnancy in the rheumatologic diseases, Best Pract
Res Clin Rheumatol. 2010;24(3):373-85
Colmegna, I., et al., HLA-B27-associated reactive arthritis: pathogenetic and clinical
considerations, Clin Microbiol Rev. 2004;17(2):348-369
Comiskey, M., et al., “MHC molecules of the preimplantation embryo and trophoblast.” In
Immunology of Pregnancy, edited by G. Mor, 130-147. New York: Springer, 2006
Conly, J. M. and Stein, K., The production of menaquinones (vitamin K2) by intestinal bacteria and
their role in maintaining coagulation homeostasis, Prog Food Nutr Sci. 1992;16(4):307-43
Correale J. and Farez, M. F., Does helminth activation of toll-like receptors modulate immune
response in multiple sclerosis patients?, Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2012;2:112
Cowie, R. L., Silica-dust-exposed mine workers with scleroderma (systemic sclerosis), Chest.
1987;92(2):260-2
Criswell, L. A., et al., Analysis of families in the multiple autoimmune disease genetics consortium
(MADGC) collection: the PTPN22 620W allele associates with multiple autoimmune phenotypes,
Am J Hum Genet. 2005;76(4):561-571
Cutolo, M., et al., Estrogens and autoimmune diseases, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2006;1089:538-47
Cutolo, M., et al., The immunomodulatory effects of estrogens: clinical relevance in immune-
mediated rheumatic diseases, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2010;1193:36-42
D’Acquisto, F. and Crompton, T., CD3+CD4-CD8 (double negative) T cells: saviours or villains of
the immune response?, Biochem Pharmacol. 2011;82(4):333-40
Dale, R. C., Post-streptococcal autoimmune disorders of the central nervous system, Dev Med
Child Neurol. 2005;47(11):785-91
Daneman, R. and Rescigno, M., The gut immune barrier and the blood-brain barrier: are they so
different?, Immunity. 2009;31(5):722-735
Delcenserie, V., et al., Immunomodulatory effects of probiotics in the intestinal tract, Curr Issues
Mol Biol. 2008;10(1-2):37-54
De Meyts, P., et al., “Insulin and IGF-I receptor structure and binding mechanism.” InMadame Curie
Bioscience Database [Internet]. Austin (TX): Landes Bioscience, 2000. Available from
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK6192/
Denkers, E. Y. and Gazzinelli, R. T., Regulation and function of T-cell-mediated immunity during
Toxoplasma gondii infection, Clin Microbiol Rev. 1998;11(4):569-88
Denkers, E. Y., Toll-like receptor initiated host defense against Toxoplasma gondii , J Biomed
Biotechnol. 2010;737125
Domingue, Sr., G. J. and Woody, H. B., Bacterial persistence and expression of disease, Clin
Microbiol Rev. 1997;10(2):320-344
Dreyfus, D. H., Autoimmune disease: A role for new anti-viral therapies?, Autoimmun Rev. 2011;11
(2):88-97
Edwards, C. J., Commensal gut bacteria and the etiopathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. J
Rheumatol. 2008;35:1477-14797
Fasano, A., Physiological, pathological, and therapeutic implications of zonulin-mediated
intestinal barrier modulation: living life on the edge of the wall. Am J Pathol. 2008;173:1243-1252
Fasano, A., Surprises from celiac disease. Sci Am. 2009;301:54-61
Fasano, A. Zonulin and its regulation of intestinal barrier function: the biological door to
inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer. Physiol Rev. 2011;91(1):151-75
Fasano, A. Leaky gut and autoimmune diseases. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2012;42(1):71-8
Fasano, A., Zonulin, regulation of tight junctions, and autoimmune diseases, Ann NY Acad Sci.
2012;1258:25-33
Frank, D. N., et al., Molecular-phylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbalances
in human inflammatory bowel diseases, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104(34):13780-5
French, M. R., et al., Validation of a phytoestrogen food frequency questionnaire with urinary
concentrations of isoflavones and lignan metabolites in premenopausal women, J Am Coll Nutr.
2007;26(1):76-82
Fulgenzi, A., et al., A case of multiple sclerosis improvement following removal of heavy metal
intoxication: lessons learnt from Matteo’s case, Biometals. 2012;25(3):569-76
Galland, L., Intestinal protozoan infection is a common unsuspected cause of chronic illness, J
Adv Med. 1989;2,529-552
Gardner, R. M., et al., Mercury induces an unopposed inflammatory response in human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells in vitro, Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117(12):1932-8
Germolec, D., et al., Animal models used to examine the role of the environment in the development
of autoimmune disease: findings from an NIEHS Expert Panel Workshop, J Autoimmun.
2012;39(4):285-93
Gregersen, P. K. and Olsson, L. M., Recent advances in the genetics of autoimmune disease, Annu
Rev Immunol. 2009;27:363-91
Groschwitz, K. R., and Hogan S. P., Intestinal barrier function: molecular regulation and disease
pathogenesis, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009;124(1):3-20
Hamdulay, S. S., et al., When is arthritis reactive?, Postgrad Med J. 2006;82(969):446-453
Han, D. Y., et al., Environmental factors in the development of chronic inflammation: a case-
control study on risk factors for Crohn’s disease within New Zealand, Mutat Res. 2010;690(1-
2):116-22
Hasni, S., et al., Helicobacter pylori and autoimmune diseases, Oral Dis. 2011;17(7):621-7
Heimesaat, M. M., et al., Gram-negative bacteria aggravate murine small intestinal Th1-type
immunopathology following oral infection with toxoplasma gondii, J Immunol. 2006;177
(12):8785-95
Hession, M. T., et al., Parvovirus B19-associated systemic lupus erythematosus: clinical mimicry
or autoimmune induction?, J Rheumatol. 2010;37(11):2430-2
Hill, M. J., Intestinal flora and endogenous vitamin synthesis, Eur J Cancer Prev. 1997;6(Suppl
1):S43-5
Hill, M. J., Role of gut bacteria in human toxicology and pharmacology. London: Taylor & Francis,
1995
Holmqvist, P., et al., Age at onset of multiple sclerosis is correlated to use of combined oral
contraceptives and childbirth before diagnosis, Fertil Steril. 2010;94(7):2835-7
Hrncir, T., et al., Gut microbiota and lipopolysaccharide content of the diet influence development
of regulatory T cells: studies in germ-free mice, BMC Immunol. 2008;9:65
Jacobson, D. L., et al., Epidemiology and estimated population burden of selected autoimmune
disease in the United States, Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1997;84:223-43
Jonuleit, H. and Schmitt, E., The regulatory T cell family: distinct subsets and their interrelations,
J Immunol. 2003;171(12):6323-7
Källberg, H., et al., Smoking is a major preventable risk factor for rheumatoid arthritis:
estimations of risks after various exposures to cigarette smoke, Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70(3):508-
11
Kayhan, B., et al., Analysis of peripheral blood lymphocyte phenotypes and Th1/Th2 cytokines
profile in the systemic immune responses of Helicobacter pylori infected individuals, Microbiol
Immunol. 2008;52(11):531-8
Keat, A., ABC of rheumatology. Spondyloarthropathies, BMJ. 1995;310(6990):1321-1324
Kennou, M. F., Skin manifestation of giardiasis. Some clinical cases. Archives de Institut Pasteur de
Tunis. 1980;51,257-260
Kidd, P., Th1/Th2 balance: the hypothesis, its limitations, and implications for health and disease,
Altern Med Rev. 2003;8(3):223-246
Kiseleva, E. P., et al., The role of components of bifidobacterium and lactobacillus in pathogenesis
and serologic diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid diseases, Benef Microbes. 2011;2(2):139-54
Koretzky, G. A., Multiple roles of CD4 and CD8 in T cell activation, J Immunol. 2010;185(5):2643-
4
Kotzamani, D., et al., Rising incidence of multiple sclerosis in females associated with
urbanization, Neurology. 2012;78(22):1728-35
Lateef, A. and Petri, M., Hormone replacement and contraceptive therapy in autoimmune diseases,
J Autoimmun. 2012;38(2-3):J170-6
Love, L. A., et al., Ultraviolet radiation intensity predicts the relative distribution of
dermatomyositis and anti-Mi-2 autoantibodies in women, Arthritis Rheum. 2009;60(8):2499-504
Luger, D., et al., Either a Th17 or a Th1 effector response can drive autoimmunity: conditions of
disease induction affect dominant effector category, J Exp Med. 2008;205(4):799-810
Maeda, E., et al., Spectrum of Epstein-Barr virus-related diseases: a pictorial review, Jpn J Radiol.
2009;27(1):4-19
Mäkelä, M., et al., Enteral virus infections in early childhood and an enhanced type 1 diabetes
associated antibody response to dietary insulin, J Autoimmun 2006;27:54-61
Marshall, T. G. and Marshall, F. E., Sarcoidosis succumbs to antibiotics: implications for
autoimmune disease, Autoimmun Rev. 2004;3(4):295-300
Mao, R., et al., Association study between methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene
polymorphisms and Graves’ disease, Cell Biochem Funct. 2010;28(7):585-90
Martinez-Gonzalez, O., et al., Intestinal permeability in patients with ankylosing spondylitis and
their healthy relatives, Br J Rheumatol. 1994;33:644-648
Massey, A., et al., Activation of the alternative pathway by gluten: a possible aetiological factor in
dermatitis herpetiformis, Immunology. 1977;33(3):339-342
Maynard, C. L., et al., Reciprocal interactions of the intestinal microbiota and immune system,
Nature. 2012;489:231-241
Ménard, S., et al., Paracellular versus transcellular intestinal permeability to gliadin peptides in
active celiac disease, Am J Pathol. 2012;180(2):608-15
Meyer, F., et al., Cutting edge: cyclooxygenase-2 activation suppresses Th1 polarization in
response to Helicobacter pylori, J Immunol. 2003;171(8):3913-7
Michel, L., et al., Increased risk of multiple sclerosis relapse after in vitro fertilisation, J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83(8):796-802
Miller, F. W., et al., Epidemiology of environmental exposures and human autoimmune diseases:
findings from a National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Expert Panel Workshop, J
Autoimmun. 2012;39(4):259-71
Mojibian, M., et al., Diabetes-specific HLA-DR-restricted proinflammatory T-cell response to
wheat polypeptides in tissue transglutaminase antibody-negative patients with type 1 diabetes,
Diabetes. 2009;58:1789-1796
Monack, D. M., et al., Persistent bacterial infections: the interface of the pathogen and the host
immune system, Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004;2:747-765
Moore, T. L., Parvovirus-associated arthritis, Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2000;12(4):289-94
Müller, A., et al., H. pylori exploits and manipulates innate and adaptive immune cell signaling
pathways to establish persistent infection, Cell Commun Signal. 2011;9(1):25
Murai, C., et al., Rheumatoid arthritis after human parvovirus B19 infection, Ann Rheum Dis.
1999;58(2):130-2
Naess, H., et al., Chronic fatigue syndrome after Giardia enteritis: clinical characteristics,
disability and long-term sickness absence, BMC Gastroenterol. 2012;12:13
Nalbandian, G. and Kovats, S., Estrogen, immunity & autoimmune disease, Curr. Med. Chem. –
Immun., Endoc. & Metab. Agents, 2005;5:85-91
Neuhausen, S. L., et al., Co-occurrence of celiac disease and other autoimmune diseases in celiacs
and their first-degree relatives, J Autoimmun. 2008;31(2):160-165
Okada, H., et al., The ‘hygiene hypothesis’ for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update , Clin
Exp Immunol. 2010;160(1):1-9
Okubo, T. and Kano, I., Studies on estrogenic activities of food additives with human breast cancer
MCF-7 cells and mechanism of estrogenicity by BHA and OPP, Yakugaku Zasshi. 2003;123(6):443-
52
Ojetti, V., et al., Small bowel bacterial overgrowth and type 1 diabetes, Eur Rev Med Pharmacol
Sci. 2009;13(6):419-23
Panthel, K., et al., Colonization of C57BL/6J and BALB/c wild-type and knockout mice with
Helicobacter pylori: effect of vaccination and implications for innate and acquired immunity,
Infect. Immun. 2003;71:794-800
Pender, M. P., CD8+ T-cell deficiency, Epstein-Barr virus infection, vitamin D deficiency, and
steps to autoimmunity: a unifying hypothesis, Autoimmune Dis. 2012:189096
Prietl, B., et al., Vitamin D supplementation and regulatory T cells in apparently healthy subjects:
vitamin D treatment for autoimmune diseases?, Isr Med Assoc J. 2010;12(3):136-9
Prieto-Garcia, A., et al., Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis: clinical presentation and
management with progesterone desensitization for successful in vitro fertilization, Fertil Steril.
2011;95(3):1121.e9-13
Qayoom, S. and Ahmad, Q. M., Psoriasis and Helicobacter pylori, Indian J Dermatol Venereol
Leprol. 2003;69(2):133-4
Qu, H., et al., Confirmation of the association of the R620W polymorphism in the protein tyrosine
phosphatase PTPN22 with type 1 diabetes in a family based study, J Med Genet 2005;42:266-270
Reeves, W. H., et al., Induction of autoimmunity by pristane and other naturally occurring
hydrocarbons, Trends Immunol. 2009;30(9):455-64
Reichelt, K. L. and Jensen, D.,IgA antibodies against gliadin and gluten in multiple sclerosis, Acta
Neurol Scand. 2004;110(4):239-241
Reinhard, G., et al., Shifts in the TH1/TH2 balance during human pregnancy correlate with
apoptotic changes, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;245(3):933-8
Rose, N. R., Mechanisms of autoimmunity, Semin Liver Dis. 2002;22:387-94
Rosenberg, I. H., Influence of intestinal bacteria on bile acid metabolism and fat absorption:
contributions from studies of blind-loop syndrome, Am J Clin Nutr. 1969;22(3):284-291
Saevarsdottir, S., et al., Patients with early rheumatoid arthritis who smoke are less likely to
respond to treatment with methotrexate and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors: observations from
the Epidemiological Investigation of Rheumatoid Arthritis and the Swedish Rheumatology Register
cohorts, Arthritis Rheum. 2011;63(1):26-36
Sakaguchi, S., et al., Regulatory T cells and immune tolerance, Cell. 2008;133(5):775-87
Sammaritano, L. R., Menopause in patients with autoimmune diseases, Autoimmun Rev. 2012;11(6-
7):A430-6
Sapone, A., et al., Spectrum of gluten-related disorders: consensus on new nomenclature and
classification, BMC Med. 2012;10:13
Scholz-Ahrens, K. E., et al., Prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics affect mineral absorption, bone
mineral content, and bone structure, J Nutr. 2007;137(3 Suppl 2):838S-46S
Schmitz, H., et al., Altered tight junction structure contributes to the impaired epithelial barrier
function in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology. 1999;116:301-307
Sears, C. L., A dynamic partnership: celebrating our gut flora, Anaerobe. 2005;11(5):247-251
Sekirov, I, et al., Gut microbiota in health and disease, Physiol Rev. 2010;90(3):859-904
Semova, I., et al., Microbiota regulate intestinal absorption and metabolism of fatty acids in the
zebrafish, Cell Host Microbe. 2012;12(3):277-288
Shapira, Y., et al., Prevalence of anti-toxoplasma antibodies in patients with autoimmune diseases,
J Autoimmun. 2012;39(1-2):112-6
Shaw, R. A. and Stevens, M. B., The reactive arthritis of giardiasis. A case report, JAMA.
1987;258,2734-2735
Sildorf, S. M., et al., Remission without insulin therapy on gluten-free diet in a 6-year old boy with
type 1 diabetes mellitus, BMJ Case Rep. 2012;pii
Singh, B., et al., Ankylosing spondylitis, HLA-B27, and Klebsiella: a study of lymphocyte reactivity
of anti-Klebsiella sera, Ann Rheum Dis. 1986;45(3):190-197
Steinman, L., A brief history of T(H)17, the first major revision in the T(H)1/T(H)2 hypothesis of T
cell-mediated tissue damage. Nat Med. 2007;13:139-145
Stetson, D. B., et al., Trex1 prevents cell-intrinsic initiation of autoimmunity, Cell.
2008;134(4):587-98
Straub, R. H., The complex role of estrogens in inflammation, Endocr Rev. 2007;28(5):521-74
Surolia, I., et al., Functionally defective germline variants of sialic acid acetylesterase in
autoimmunity, Nature. 2010;466(7303):243-7
Sweeten, T. L., et al., Increased prevalence of familial autoimmunity in probands with pervasive
developmental disorders, Pediatrics. 2003;112(5):e420
Tani, Y., et al., Antibodies to Klebsiella, Proteus, and HLA-B27 peptides in Japanese patients with
ankylosing spondylitis and rheumatoid arthritis, J Rheumatol. 1997;24(1):109-14
Tlaskalová-Hogenová, H., et al., The role of gut microbiota (commensal bacteria) and the mucosal
barrier in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases and cancer: contribution of
germ-free and gnotobiotic animal models of human diseases, Cell Mol Immunol. 2011;8(2):110-20
Toussirot, E. and Roudier, J., Epstein-Barr virus in autoimmune diseases, Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol. 2008;22(5):883-96
Turner, J. R., Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease, Nat Rev Immunol.
2009;9:799-809
Vaarala, O., Is the origin of type 1 diabetes in the gut?, Immunol Cell Biol. 2012;90(3):271-6
Vaile, J. H., et al., Bowel permeability and CD45RO expression on circulating CD20+ B cells in
patients with ankylosing spondylitis and their relatives, J Rheumatol. 1999;26:128-133
Vignali, D. A., et al., How regulatory T cells work, Nat Rev Immunol. 2008;8(7):523-32
Walker, S. E., Estrogen and autoimmune disease, Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2011;40(1):60-5
Weinstock, L. B. and Walters A. S., Restless legs syndrome is associated with irritable bowel
syndrome and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, Sleep Med. 2011;12(6):610-3
Weisman, B. L., Urticaria and Giardia lamblia infections, Annals of Allergy. 1979;49,91
Wendling, D., et al., Evaluation de la perméabilité intestinale au cours de la spondylarthrite
ankylosante par le test au 51Cr-EDTA, Rev Esp Reumatol. 1992;19:253-256
Westall, F. C., Abnormal hormonal control of gut hydrolytic enzymes causes autoimmune attack on
the CNS by production of immune-mimic and adjuvant molecules: a comprehensive explanation
for the induction of multiple sclerosis, Med Hypotheses. 2007;68:364-369
Wilhelm, R. E., Urticaria associated with giardiasis lamblia, J Allergy. 1957;28:351-353
Woo, P. and Panayi, G. S., Reactive arthritis due to infestation with Giardia lamblia, J Rheumatol.
1984;11:719
Wooley, P. H., et al., Pristane-induced arthritis. The immunologic and genetic features of an
experimental murine model of autoimmune disease, Arthritis Rheum. 1989;32(8):1022-30
Yacyshyn, B., et al., Multiple sclerosis patients have peripheral blood CD45RO+ B cells and
increased intestinal permeability, Dig Dis Sci. 1996;41:2493-2501
Yacyshyn, B. R. and Meddings J. B., CD45RO expression on circulating CD19+ B cells in Crohn’s
disease correlates with intestinal permeability, Gastroenterology. 1995;08:132-138
Yokote, H., et al., NKT cell-dependent amelioration of a mouse model of multiple sclerosis by
altering gut flora, Am J Pathol. 2008;173:1714-1723
Zaccone, P., et al., Parasitic worms and inflammatory diseases, Parasite Immunol.
2006;28(10):515-523

Chapter 2:
Dietary Factors That Contribute to Autoimmunity
Abdel-Salam, O. M., et al., Effect of aspartame on oxidative stress and monoamine
neurotransmitter levels in lipopolysaccharide-treated mice, Neurotox Res. 2012;21(3):245-55
Aditi, A. and Graham, D. Y., Vitamin C, gastritis, and gastric disease: a historical review and
update, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(10):2504-15
Afaghi, A., et al., Effect of low-glycemic load diet on changes in cardiovascular risk factors in
poorly controlled diabetic patients, Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(6):991-5
Afridi, H. I., et al., Evaluation of status of zinc, copper, and iron levels in biological samples of
normal and arthritis patients in age groups 46-60 and 61-75 years, Clin Lab. 2012;58(7-8):705-17
Agardh, D., et al., Reduction of tissue transglutaminase autoantibody levels by gluten-free diet is
associated with changes in subsets of peripheral blood lymphocytes in children with newly
diagnosed coeliac disease, Clin Exp Immunol. 2006;144(1):67-75
Agostoni, C. and Turck, D., Is cow’s milk harmful to a child’s health? , J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2011;53(6):594-600
Alaedini, A. and Latov, N., Transglutaminase-independent binding of gliadin to intestinal brush
border membrane and GM1 ganglioside, J Neuroimmunol. 2006;177(1-2):167-72
Al-Hassi, H. O., et al., A mechanistic role for leptin in human dendritic cell migration: differences
between ileum and colon in health and Crohn’s disease, Mucosal Immunol. 2013;6(4):751-61
Al-Saleh, A. M., et al., Effect of artificial sweeteners on insulin secretion, ROS, and oxygen
consumption in pancreatic beta cells, The FASEB Journal. 2011;25:530.1
Altinova, A. E., et al., Serum ghrelin levels in patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Thyroid.
2006;16(12):1259-64
Andrews, Z. B., et al., UCP2 mediates ghrelin’s action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free
radicals, Nature. 2008;454(7206):846-51
Antvorskov, J. C., et al., Dietary gluten alters the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines in T cells of BALB/c mice, Immunology. 2013;138(1):23-33
Antvorskov, J. C., et al., Impact of dietary gluten on regulatory T cells and Th17 cells in BALB/c
mice, PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33315
Arabski, M., et al., Effects of saponins against clinical E. coli strains and eukaryotic cell line, J
Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:286216
Arent, S. M., et al., The effects of theaflavin-enriched black tea extract on muscle soreness,
oxidative stress, inflammation, and endocrine responses to acute anaerobic interval training: a
randomized, double-blind, crossover study, J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2010;7(1):11
Aryaeian, N., et al., Effect of conjugated linoleic acids, vitamin E and their combination on the
clinical outcome of Iranian adults with active rheumatoid arthritis, Int J Rheum Dis.
2009;12(1):20-8
Ata, N., et al., The metabolic syndrome is associated with complicated gallstone disease, Can J
Gastroenterol. 2011;25(5):274-276
Baatar, D., et al., The effects of ghrelin on inflammation and the immune system, Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2011;340(1):44-58
Bach, J. F., Why is the incidence of autoimmune diseases increasing in the modern world?,
Endocrine Abstracts. 2008;16:S3.1
Bagheri, K., et al., Decreased serum level of soluble-leptin-receptor in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus, Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2012;14(9):587-93
Bardocz, S., et al., The effect of phytohaemagglutinin at different dietary concentrations on the
growth, body composition and plasma insulin of the rat, Br J Nutr. 1996;76(4):613-26
Barikbin, B., et al., Antioxidant status in patients with lichen planus, Clin Exp Dermatol.
2011;36(8):851-4
Barnard, N. D., Trends in food availability, 1909-2007, Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91(5):1530S-1536S
Barrera, L. N., et al., TrxR1 and GPx2 are potently induced by isothiocyanates and selenium, and
mutually cooperate to protect Caco-2 cells against free radical-mediated cell death, Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2012;1823(10):1914-24
Basciano, H., et al., Fructose, insulin resistance, and metabolic dyslipidemia, Nutr Metab (Lond).
2005;2(1):5
Bassaganya-Riera, J., et al., Conjugated linoleic acid modulates immune responses in patients with
mild to moderately active Crohn’s disease, Clin Nutr. 2012;31(5):721-7
Batra, A., et al., Leptin: a critical regulator of CD4+ T-cell polarization in vitro and in vivo,
Endocrinology. 2010;151(1):56-62
Batchelor, A. J. and Compston, J. E., Reduced plasma half-life of radio-labeled 25-hydroxyvitamin
D3 in subjects receiving a high fiber diet, Brit J Nutr. 1983;49:213-16
Beaudoin, M. S., et al., Caffeine ingestion impairs insulin sensitivity in a dose-dependent manner
in both men and women, Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2013;38(2):140-7
Beharka, A., et al., Vitamin E status and immune function, Methods Enzymol. 1997;282:247-63
Belch, J. J. and Hill, A., Evening primrose oil and borage oil in rheumatologic conditions, Am J
Clin Nutr. 2000;71(1 Suppl):352S-6S
Bengmark, S., Gut microbiota, immune development and function, Pharmacol Res. 2013;69(1):87-
113
Bernotiene, E., et al., The role of leptin in innate and adaptive immune responses, Arthritis Res
Ther. 2006;8(5):217
Bhattacharya, A., et al., Different ratios of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic omega-3 fatty
acids in commercial fish oils differentially alter pro-inflammatory cytokines in peritoneal
macrophages from C57BL/6 female mice, J Nutr Biochem. 2007;18(1):23-30
Białek, A. and Tokarz, A., Conjugated linoleic acid as a potential protective factor in prevention
of breast cancer, Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013;67(0):6-14
Blikslager, A. T., et al., Restoration of barrier function in injured intestinal mucosa, Physiol Rev.
2007;87(2):545-64
Bindels, L. B., et al., Gut microbiota-derived propionate reduces cancer cell proliferation in the
liver, Br J Cancer. 2012;107(8):1337-44
Boden, G., et al., Effects of prolonged hyperinsulinemia on serum leptin in normal human subjects,
J Clin Invest. 1997;100(5):1107-1113
Boekema, P. J., et al., Coffee and gastrointestinal function: facts and fiction: a review, Scand J
Gastroenterol. 1999;34(230):35-39
Bonfig, W., et al., Selenium supplementation does not decrease thyroid peroxidase antibody
concentration in children and adolescents with autoimmune thyroiditis , ScientificWorldJournal.
2010;10:990-6
Bonthuis, M., et al., Dairy consumption and patterns of mortality of Australian adults, Eur J Clin
Nutr. 2010;64:569-577
     Booth, C. and Potten, C. S., Gut instincts: thoughts on intestinal epithelial stem cells, J Clin
Invest. 2000;105(11):1493-1499
Bornet, F. R., Undigestible sugars in food products, Am J Clin Nutr. 1994;59(3 Suppl):763S-769S
Bray, G. A., et al., Consumption of high-fructose corn syrup in beverages may play a role in the
epidemic of obesity, Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79(4):537-43
Brooke, O. G., et al., Observations of the vitamin D state of pregnant Asian women in London, Brit
J Obstet Gynaecol. 1981;88:18-26
Brown, K. M. and Arthur, J. R., Selenium, selenoproteins and human health: a review, Public
Health Nutr. 2001;4(2B):593-9
Brown, R. J. and Rother, K. I., Non-nutritive sweeteners and their role in the gastrointestinal tract,
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(8):2597-605
Brownawell, A. M., et al., Prebiotics and the health benefits of fiber: current regulatory status,
future research, and goals, J Nutr. 2012;142(5):962-74
Browning, J. D. et al., Short-term weight loss and hepatic triglyceride reduction: evidence of a
metabolic advantage with dietary carbohydrate restriction, Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93:1048-1052
Bruun, J. M., et al., Interleukin-18 in plasma and adipose tissue: effects of obesity, insulin
resistance, and weight loss, Eur J Endocrinol. 2007;157:465-471
Brusick, D. J., A critical review of the genetic toxicity of steviol and steviol glycosides, Food Chem
Toxicol. 2008;46(Suppl 7):S83-91
Bures, J., et al., Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome, World J Gastroenterol.
2010;16(24):2978-2990
Cabrera-Chávez, F., et al., Maize prolamins resistant to peptic-tryptic digestion maintain immune-
recognition by IgA from some celiac disease patients, Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2012;67(1):24, 30
Caputo, I., et al., Tissue transglutaminase in celiac disease: role of autoantibodies, Amino Acids.
2009;36(4):693-99
Caputo, I., et al., Gliadin peptides induce tissue transglutaminase activation and ER-stress through
Ca2+ mobilization in Caco-2 cells, PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45209
Carbone, F., et al., Immunological functions of leptin and adiponectin, Biochimie.
2012;94(10):2082-8
Carlé, A., et al., Graves’ hyperthyroidism and moderate alcohol consumption: evidence for disease
prevention, Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013;79(1):111-9
Carreno-Gómez, B., et al., Studies on the uptake of tomato lectin nanoparticles in everted gut sacs,
Int J Pharm, 1999;183(1):7-11
Çekın, A. H., et al., Celiac disease prevalence in patients with iron deficiency anemia, Turk J
Gastroenterol. 2012;23(5):490-5
Centers for Disease Control (www.cdc.gov)
Ceriello, A., et al., Evidence that hyperglycemia after recovery from hypoglycemia worsens
endothelial function and increases oxidative stress and inflammation in healthy control subjects
and subjects with type 1 diabetes, Diabetes. 2012;61(11):2993-7
Chacko, S. A., et al., Relations of dietary magnesium intake to biomarkers of inflammation and
endothelial dysfunction in an ethnically diverse cohort of postmenopausal women, Diabetes Care.
2010;33(2):304-10
Chan, E. S. and Cronstein, B. N., Methotrexate—how does it really work?, Nat Rev Rheumatol.
2010;6(3):175-8
Chapkin, R. S., et al., Dietary docosahexaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acid: emerging mediators of
inflammation, Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2009;81(2-3):187-91
Chasapis, C. T., et al., Zinc and human health: an update, Arch Toxicol. 2012;86(4):521-34
Chen, M. C., et al., Apical and basolateral EGF receptors regulate gastric mucosal paracellular
permeability, Am. J. Physiol., Gastrointes. Liver Physiol. 2001;280(2):G264-72
Chen, W. Q., et al., Protective effects of green tea polyphenols on cognitive impairments induced
by psychological stress in rats, Behav Brain Res. 2009;202(1):71-6
Childers, N. F., and Margoles, M. S., An apparent relation of nightshades (solanaceae) to arthritis,
J Neurol Orth Med S. 1993;12:227-231
Chimienti, F., Zinc, pancreatic islet cell function and diabetes: new insights into an old story, Nutr
Res Rev. 2013;26(1):1-11
Cantorna, M. T. and Mahon, B. D., Mounting evidence for vitamin D as an environmental factor
affecting autoimmune disease prevalence, Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2004;229(11):1136-42
Conly, J. M. and Stein, K., The production of menaquinones (vitamin K2) by intestinal bacteria and
their role in maintaining coagulation homeostasis, Prog Food Nutr Sci. 1992;16(4):307-43
Conly, J. M., et al., The contribution of vitamin K2 (menaquinones) produced by the intestinal
microflora to human nutritional requirements for vitamin K , Am J Gastroenterol. 1994;89(6):915-
23
Cordain, L., The nutritional characteristics of a contemporary diet based upon Paleolithic food
groups, JANA. 2002;5(3):15-24
Cordain, L., et al., Origins and evolution of the Western diet: health implications for the 21st
century, Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;81(2):341-54
Coss-Bu, J. A., et al., Contribution of galactose and fructose to glucose homeostasis, Metabolism.
2009;58(8):1050-8
Costenbader, K. H., et al., Antioxidant intake and risks of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus in women, Am J Epidemiol. 2010;172(2):205-16
Coudray, C., et al., Effects of dietary fibers on magnesium absorption in animals and humans, J
Nutr. 2003;133(1):1-4
Cox, M. B., et al., Potential association of vitamin D receptor polymorphism Taq1 with multiple
sclerosis, Mult Scler. 2012;18(1):16-22
Creamer, B., et al., The turnover and shedding of epithelial cells. Part 1: The turnover in the
gastrointestinal tract, Gut;1961;2:110-116
Credo, R. B., et al., Inhibition of fibrinoligase and transglutaminase by zinc ions, Fed. Proc.
1976:35(7)
Crowe, F. L., et al., The association between diet and serum concentrations of IGF-I, IGFBP-1,
IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-3 in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition          ,
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;18(5):1333-40
Cruz-Teno, C., et al., Dietary fat modifies the postprandial inflammatory state in subjects with
metabolic syndrome: the LIPGENE study, Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012;56(6):854-65
Cunnane, S. C., Problems with essential fatty acids: time for a new paradigm? Prog Lipid Res.
2003;42(6):544-568
Cutolo, M., et al., Vitamin D in rheumatoid arthritis, Autoimmun Rev. 2007;7(1):59-64
Deboer, M. D., Use of ghrelin as a treatment for inflammatory bowel disease: mechanistic
considerations, Int J Pept. 2011;2011:189242
Delhanty, P. J. and van der Lely, A. J., Ghrelin and glucose homeostasis, Peptides.
2011;32(11):2309-18
Dalla Pellegrina, C., et al., Plant lectins as carriers for oral drugs: is wheat germ agglutinin a
suitable candidate? Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2005;207:170-178
Dalla Pellegrina, C., et al., Studies on the joint cytotoxicity of wheat germ agglutinin and
monensin, Toxicol In Vitro. 2004;18:821-827
Daniel, J. M. and Reynolds, A. B.,Tyrosine phosphorylation and cadherin/catenin function,
Bioessays 1997;19, 883-891
De Mejia, E. G., et al., Tannins, trypsin inhibitors and lectin cytotoxicity in tepary (Phaseolus
acutifolius) and common (Phaseolus vulgaris) beans, Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2005;60(3):137-45
Deng, J., et al., Leptin exacerbates collagen-induced arthritis via enhancement of Th17 cell
response, Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(11):3564-73
de Rooij, F. W., et al., Lysosomal damage by gliadin and gliadin peptides: an activity not related
to coeliac disease, Clin Chim Acta. 1979;91(2):127-31
Dickey, W., Low serum vitamin B12 is common in coeliac disease and is not due to autoimmune
gastritis, Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002;14(4):425-7
Dills, W. L. Jr., Sugar alcohols as bulk sweeteners, Annu Rev Nutr. 1989;9:161-86
Dixit, V. D., et al., Ghrelin inhibits leptin- and activation-induced proinflammatory cytokine
expression by human monocytes and T cells, J Clin Invest. 2004;114(1):57-66
Dowd, P. F., et al., Enhanced pest resistance of maize leaves expressing monocot crop plant-
derived ribosome-inactivating protein and agglutinin, J Agric Food Chem. 2012;60(43):10768-75
Du, H., et al., Glycemic index and glycemic load in relation to food and nutrient intake and
metabolic risk factors in a Dutch population, Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87:655-661
Dukowicz, A. C., et al., Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: a comprehensive review,
Gastroenterol Hepatol (N Y). 2007;3(2):112-122
Duncan, F. J., et al., Endogenous retinoids in the pathogenesis of alopecia areata, J Invest
Dermatol. 2013;133(2):334-43
Dunn, W. A. and Hubbard, A. L., Receptor-mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor by
hepatocytes in the perfused rat liver: ligand and receptor dynamics, J. Cell Biol. 1984;98:2184-
2195
Duntas, L. H., Selenium and inflammation: underlying anti-inflammatory mechanisms, Horm Metab
Res. 2009;41(6):443-7
Eastman, C. J., Screening for thyroid disease and iodine deficiency, Pathology. 2012;44(2):153-9
Ebbeling, C. B., et al., Effects of dietary composition on energy expenditure during weight-loss
maintenance, JAMA. 2012;307(24):2627-2634
Ebert. E. C., The thyroid and the gut, J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010;44(6):402-6
Ebert, E. C. and Hagspiel, K. D.,Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestations of rheumatoid
arthritis, Dig Dis Sci. 2011;56(2):295-302
Ejsing-Duun, M., et al., Dietary gluten reduces the number of intestinal regulatory T cells in mice,
Scand J Immunol. 2008;67(6):553-9
Ertek, S., et al., Relationship between serum zinc levels, thyroid hormones and thyroid volume
following successful iodine supplementation, Hormones (Athens). 2010;9(3):263-8
Esposito, K. and Giugliano, D., Diet and inflammation: a link to metabolic and cardiovascular
diseases, Eur Heart J. 2006;27:15-20
Faeh, D., et al., Effect of fructose overfeeding and fish oil administration on hepatic de novo
lipogenesis and insulin sensitivity in healthy men, Diabetes. 2005;54(7):1907-13
Faith, J. J., et al., Predicting a human gut microbiota’s response to diet in gnotobiotic mice ,
Science. 2011;333(6038):101-4
Fantuzzi, G. and Faggioni, R., Leptin in the regulation of immunity, inflammation, and
hematopoiesis, J Leukoc Biol. 2000;68(4):437-46
Feng, Y., et al., A folate receptor beta-specific human monoclonal antibody recognizes activated
macrophage of rheumatoid patients and mediates antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity,
Arthritis Res Ther. 2011;13(2):R59
Ferland, G., Vitamin K, an emerging nutrient in brain function, Biofactors. 2012;38(2):151-7
Fernandes, G., Dietary lipids and risk of autoimmune disease, Clin Immunol Immunopathol.
1994;72(2):193-7
Ferretti, G., et al., Celiac disease, inflammation and oxidative damage: a nutrigenetic approach,
Nutrients. 2012;4(4):243-257
Ferrucci, L., et al., Relationship of plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids to circulating inflammatory
markers, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:439-46
Festa, A., et al., Chronic subclinical inflammation as part of the insulin resistance syndrome: the
insulin resistance atherosclerosis study (IRAS), Circulation. 2000;102:42-47
Food Standards Australia New Zealand, Cyanogenic glycosides in cassava and bamboo shoots: a
human health risk assessment, Technical Report Series No. 28, 2005
Forceville, X., Seleno-enzymes and seleno-compounds: the two faces of selenium, Crit Care.
2006;10(6):180
Francis, G., et al., The biological action of saponins in animal systems: a review, Br J Nutr.
2002;88(6):587-605
Fraser, D. A., et al., Decreased CD4+ lymphocyte activation and increased interleukin-4
production in peripheral blood of rheumatoid arthritis patients after acute starvation, Clin.
Rheumatol. 1999;18:394
Freed, D. L. J., Do dietary lectins cause disease? The evidence is suggestive–and raises interesting
possibilities for treatment, BMJ. 1999;318(7190):1023-1024
Freedman, N. D., et al., Association of coffee drinking with total and cause-specific mortality, N
Engl J Med. 2012;366(20):1891-904
Friedman, M. and Brandon, D. L., Nutritional and health benefits of soy proteins, J Agric Food
Chem. 2001;49(3):1069-86
Friedman, M., Potato glycoalkaloids and metabolites: roles in the plant and in the diet, J Agric
Food Chem. 2006;54(23):8655-81
Forsythe, C., et al., Comparison of low fat and low carbohydrate diets on circulating fatty acid
composition and markers of inflammation, Lipids. 2008;43:65-77
Fowler, S. P., et al., Fueling the obesity epidemic? Artificially sweetened beverage use and long-
term weight gain, Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008;16(8):1894-900
Friis, S., et al., Gliadin uptake in human enterocytes. Differences between coeliac patients in
remission and control individuals, Gut. 1992;33(11):1487-1492
Gabor, F., et al., Lectin-mediated drug delivery: binding and uptake of BSA-WGA conjugates using
the Caco-2 model, Int. J. Pharm. 2002;237:227-239
Gabor, F., et al., The lectin-cell interaction and its implications to intestinal lectin-mediated drug
delivery, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2004;56:459-480
García, O. P., Effect of vitamin A deficiency on the immune response in obesity, Proc Nutr Soc.
2012;71(2):290-7
García, O. P., et al., Zinc, vitamin A, and vitamin C status are associated with leptin
concentrations and obesity in Mexican women: results from a cross-sectional study , Nutr Metab
(Lond). 2012;9(1):59
Gastman, B., et al., A novel apoptotic pathway as defined by lectin cellular initiation, Biochim.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004;316:263-271
Gee, J. M., et al., Effects of saponins and glycoalkaloids on the permeability and viability of
mammalian intestinal cells and on the integrity of tissue preparations in vitro, Toxicol In Vitro.
1996;10(2):117-28
Gee, J. M., et al., Effect of saponin on the transmucosal passage of beta-lactoglobulin across the
proximal small intestine of normal and beta-lactoglobulin-sensitised rats, Toxicology.
1997;117(2-3):219-28
Geleijnse, J. M., et al., Dietary intake of menaquinone is associated with a reduced risk of
coronary heart disease: the Rotterdam Study, J Nutr. 2004;134(11):3100-5
Ghazavi, A., et al., High copper and low zinc serum levels in Iranian patients with multiple
sclerosis: a case control study, Clin Lab. 2012;58(1-2):161-4
Ghosh, S., et al., Diets rich in n-6 PUFA induce intestinal microbial dysbiosis in aged mice, Br J
Nutr. 2013;110(3):515-23
Gibson, R. S., et al., The vitamin D status of East Indian Punjabi immigrants to Canada, Brit J
Nutr. 1987;58:23-29
Glushakova, O., et al., Fructose induces the inflammatory molecule ICAM-1 in endothelial cells, J
Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19(9):1712-1720
     Godlewski, M. M., et al., Into the unknown: the death pathways in the neonatal gut
epithelium, Curr Pediatr Rev. 2011;7(4):337-345
Gorjão, R., et al., Comparative effects of DHA and EPA on cell function, Pharmacol Ther.
2009;122(1):56-64
Grant, G., et al., Consumption of diets containing raw soya beans (Glycine max), kidney beans
(Phaseolus vulgaris), cowpeas (Vigna unguiculata) or lupin seeds (Lupinus angustifolius) by rats
for up to 700 days: effects on body composition and organ weights, Br J Nutr. 1995;73(1):17-29
Grant, S. M., et al., Iron-deficient mice fail to develop autoimmune encephalomyelitis, J Nutr.
2003;133(8):2635-8
Greene, W. C., et al., Stimulation of immunoglobulin biosynthesis in human B cells by wheat germ
agglutinin, J. Immunol. 1981;127,799-804
Greer, F. and Pusztai, A., Toxicity of kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) in rats: changes in
intestinal permeability, Digestion. 1985;32(1):42-6
Grimble, R. F., Nutritional antioxidants and the modulation of inflammation: theory and practice,
New Horiz. 1994;2(2):175-85
Groschwitz, K. R. and Hogan, S. P., Intestinal barrier function: molecular regulation and disease
pathogenesis, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009;124(1):3-20
Gross, L. S., et al., Increased consumption of refined carbohydrates and the epidemic of type 2
diabetes in the United States: an ecologic assessment, Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79(5):774-9
Gruendel, S., et al., Carob pulp preparation rich in insoluble dietary fibre and polyphenols
increases plasma glucose and serum insulin responses in combination with a glucose load in
humans, Br J Nutr. 2007;98(1):101-5
Gunta, S. S. and Mak, R. H.,Ghrelin and leptin pathophysiology in chronic kidney disease, Pediatr
Nephrol. 2013;28(4):611-6
Gupta, R. K., et al., Soybean agglutinin coated PLA particles entrapping candidate vaccines
induces enhanced primary and sustained secondary antibody response from single point
immunization, Eur J Pharm Sci. 2012;45(3):282-95
Gupta, Y. P., Antinutritional and toxic factors in food legumes: a review, Plant Foods Hum Nutr.
1987;37:201-228
Halade, G. V., et al., Docosahexaenoic acid-enriched fish oil attenuates kidney disease and
prolongs median and maximal life span of autoimmune lupus-prone mice, J Immunol.
2010;184(9):5280-6
Handunnetthi, L., et al., Multiple sclerosis, vitamin D, and HLA-DRB1*15, Neurology.
2010;74(23):1905-10
Hansen, A. K., et al., Diabetes preventive gluten-free diet decreases the number of caecal bacteria
in non-obese diabetic mice, Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2006;22(3):220-5
Harbige, L. S., Nutrition and immunity with emphasis on infection and autoimmune disease, Nutr
Health. 1996;10(4):285-312
Harris, K., et al., Is the gut microbiota a new factor contributing to obesity and its metabolic
disorders?, J Obes. 2012;2012:879151
Hashida, S., et al., Concentration of egg white lysozyme in the serum of healthy subjects after oral
administration, Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2002;29(1-2):79-83
Hah, Y. S., et al., Dietary alpha lipoic acid supplementation prevents synovial inflammation and
bone destruction in collagen-induced arthritic mice, Rheumatol Int. 2011;31(12):1583-90
Heal, K. G. and Taylor-Robinson, A. W., Tomatine adjuvantation of protective immunity to a major
pre-erythrocytic vaccine candidate of malaria is mediated via CD8+ T cell release of IFN-gamma,
J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:834326
Hellström, U., et al., The interaction of nonmitogenic and mitogenic lectins with T lymphocytes:
association of cellular receptor sites, Scand J Immunol. 1976;5(1-2):45-54
Hendricks, R. and Pool, E. J.,The in vitro effects of rooibos and black tea on immune pathways, J
Immunoassay Immunochem. 2010;31(2):169-80
Hennebelle, M., et al., Influence of omega-3 fatty acid status on the way rats adapt to chronic
restraint stress, PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42142
Heyman, M. and Menard, S., Pathways of gliadin transport in celiac disease, Ann NY Acad Sci.
2009;1165:274-8
Heyman, M., et al., Intestinal permeability in coeliac disease: insight into mechanisms and
relevance to pathogenesis, Gut. 2012;61(9):1355-64
Himoto, T., et al., Contribution of zinc deficiency to insulin resistance in patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis, Biol Trace Elem Res. 2011;144(1-3):133-42
Holding, D. and Messing, J., “Evolution, Structure, and Function of Prolamin Storage Proteins.” In
Seed Genomics, edited by P. W. Becraft, 138-158. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013
Holick, M. F., Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention of autoimmune diseases,
cancers, and cardiovascular disease, Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;80(6 Suppl):1678S-88S
Holm, V., Further studies of the concentration of magnesium ion (Mg++) in blood from patients
with autoimmune diseases, Dan Med Bull. 1983;30(3):180-4
Hönscheid, A., et al., T-lymphocytes: a target for stimulatory and inhibitory effects of zinc ions ,
Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2009;9(2):132-44
Hoppe, C., et al., High intakes of milk, but not meat, increase s-insulin and insulin resistance in 8-
year-old boys, Eur J Clin Nutr. 2005;59,393-398
Huda, M. S. B., et al., Ghrelin does not orchestrate the metabolic changes seen in fasting but has
significant effects on lipid mobilisation and substrate utilisation, Eur J Endocrinol. 2011;165:45-
55
Hummel, K., et al., The increasing onset of type 1 diabetes in children, J Pediatr. 2012;161(4):652-
7
Hunt, S. P., et al., Vitamin D status in different subgroups of British Asians, Br Med J.
1976;2:1351-54 Issazadeh-Navikas, S., et al., Influence of dietary components on regulatory T
cells, Mol Med. 2012;18:95-110
Iwai, T., et al., Dynamic changes in the distribution of minerals in relation to phytic acid
accumulation during rice seed development, Plant Physiol. 2012;160(4):2007-14
Jacobson, D. L., et al., Epidemiology and estimated population burden of selected autoimmune
diseases in the United States, Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1997;84(3):223-43
Jafarirad, S., et al., The effect of vitamin A supplementation on stimulated T-cell proliferation with
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein in patients with multiple sclerosis , J Neurosci Rural Pract.
2012;3(3):294-8
Jakubíková, J., et al., Effect of isothiocyanates on nuclear accumulation of NF-kappaB, Nrf2, and
thioredoxin in caco-2 cells, J Agric Food Chem. 2006;54(5):1656-62
Jakubowicz, D., et al., Meal timing and composition influence ghrelin levels, appetite scores and
weight loss maintenance in overweight and obese adults, Steroids. 2012;77(4):323-31
Javanbakht, M., et al., Serum selenium, zinc, and copper in early diagnosed patients with
pemphigus vulgaris, Iran J Public Health. 2012;41(5):105-9
Jeffries, M. A., et al., Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in CD4+ T cells from patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus, Epigenetics. 2011;6(5):593-601
Jensen-Jarolim, E., et al., Hot spices influence permeability of human intestinal epithelial
monolayers, J Nutr.,1998;128(3):577-81
Jian, L., et al., Do preserved foods increase prostate cancer risk?, Br J Cancer. 2004;90(9):1792-5
Johnson, G. H. and Fritsche, K., Effect of dietary linoleic acid on markers of inflammation in
healthy persons: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials , J Acad Nutr Diet.
2012;112(7):1029-41
Jordinson, M., et al., Systemic effect of peanut agglutinin following intravenous infusion into rats,
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2000;14(6):835-40
Judd, S. E., and Tangpricha, V., Vitamin D deficiency and risk for cardiovascular disease, Am J
Med Sci. 2009;338(1):40-44
Junker, Y., et al., Wheat amylase trypsin inhibitors drive intestinal inflammation via activation of
toll-like receptor 4, J Exp Med. 2012;209(13):2395-408
Kaczmarczyk, M. M., et al., The health benefits of dietary fiber: beyond the usual suspects of type 2
diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease and colon cancer, Metabolism. 2012;61(8):1058-66
Kallio, P., et al., Dietary carbohydrate modification induces alterations in gene expression in
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue in persons with the metabolic syndrome: the FUNGENUT
Study, Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85:1417-1427
Karagiozoglou-Lampoudi, T., et al., Ghrelin levels in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis:
relation to anti-tumor necrosis factor treatment and disease activity , Metabolism.
2011;60(10):1359-62
Karihtala, P. and Soini, Y., Reactive oxygen species and antioxidant mechanisms in human tissues
and their relation to malignancies, APMIS. 2007;115(2):81-103
Karimzadeh, L., et al., Relation between nitrate and nitrite food habits with lung cancer, J Exp
Ther Oncol. 2012;10(2):107-12
Karlsson, A., Wheat germ agglutinin induces NADPH-Oxidase activity in human neutrophils by
interaction with mobilizable receptors, Infect. Immun. 1999;67,3461-3468
Karlsson, J., et al., Paracellular drug transport across intestinal epithelia: influence of charge and
induced water flux, Eur J Pharm Sci. 1999;9(1):47-56
Kashyap, P. C., et al., Complex interactions among diet, gastrointestinal transit, and gut
microbiota in humanized mice, Gastroenterology. 2013;144(5):967-77
Kawakami, K., et al., Effect of wheat germ agglutinin on T lymphocyte activation, Microbiol.
Immunol. 1988;32,413-422
Kawazoe, Y., et al., Retinoic acid from retinal pigment epithelium induces T regulatory cells , Exp
Eye Res. 2012;94(1):32-40
Kemp, A., Food additives and hyperactivity, BMJ. 2008;336(7654):1144
Keukens, E. A., et al., Glycoalkaloids selectively permeabilize cholesterol containing
biomembranes, Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996;1279(2):243-50
Kharaeva, Z., et al., Clinical and biochemical effects of coenzyme Q(10), vitamin E, and selenium
supplementation to psoriasis patients, Nutrition. 2009;25(3):295-302
Kidd, P., Th1/Th2 balance: the hypothesis, its limitations, and implications for health and disease,
Altern Med Rev. 2003;8(3):223-46
Kilpatrick, D. C., et al., Tomato lectin resists digestion in the mammalian alimentary canal and
binds to intestinal villi without deleterious effects, FEBS Lett. 1985;185:299-305
Kilpatrick, D. C., et al., Inhibition of human lymphocyte transformation by tomato lectin, Scand J
Immunol. 1986;24(1):11-9
Kim, H. R., et al., Green tea protects rats against autoimmune arthritis by modulating disease-
related immune events, J Nutr. 2008;138(11):2111-6
Kim, J. S., et al., Oxidant stress and skeletal muscle glucose transport: roles of insulin signaling
and p38 MAPK, Free Radic Biol Med. 2006;41(5):818-24
Kim, K. J., et al., Serum leptin levels are associated with the presence of syndesmophytes in male
patients with ankylosing spondylitis, Clin Rheumatol. 2012;31(8):1231-8
Kivling, A., et al., Diverse foxp3 expression in children with type 1 diabetes and celiac disease,
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2008;1150:273-7
Kleinewietfeld, M., et al., Sodium chloride drives autoimmune disease by the induction of
pathogenic TH17 cells, Nature. 2013;496(7446):518-22
Knudsen, D., et al., Soyasaponins resist extrusion cooking and are not degraded during gut
passage in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.), J Agric Food Chem. 2006;54(17):6428-35
Kokrashvili, Z., et al., Taste signaling elements expressed in gut enteroendocrine cells regulate
nutrient-responsive secretion of gut hormones, Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90(3):822S-825S
Komaki, G., et al., Alteration in lymphocyte subsets and pituitary-adrenal gland related hormones
during fasting, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1997;66:147
Kondor-Koch. C., et al., Exocytotic pathways exist to both the apical and the basolateral cell
surface of the polarized epithelial cell MDCK, Cell. 1985;43(1):297-306
Kong, W., et al., Docosahexaenoic acid prevents dendritic cell maturation and in vitro and in vivo
expression of the IL-12 cytokine family, Lipids Health Dis. 2010;9:12
Kong, W., et al., Docosahexaenoic acid prevents dendritic cell maturation, inhibits antigen-
specific Th1/Th17 differentiation and suppresses experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis,
Brain Behav Immun. 2011;25(5):872-82
Korpan, Y. I., et al., Potato glycoalkaloids: true safety or false sense of security?, Trends
Biotechnol. 2004;22(3):147-51
Koshy, A. S., et al., Evaluation of serum vitamin B12 levels in type 1 diabetics attending a tertiary
care hospital: A preliminary cross-sectional study , Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(Suppl
1):S79-82
Kozáková, H., et al., Brush border enzyme activities in the small intestine after long-term gliadin
feeding in animal models of human coeliac disease, Folia Microbiol (Praha). 1998;43(5):497-500
Kriketos, A. D., et al., Postprandial triglycerides in response to high fat: role of dietary
carbohydrate, Eur J Clin Invest. 2003;33(5):383-9
Krygsman, A., “Importance of dietary fatty acid profile and experimental conditions in the obese
insulin-resistant rodent model of metabolic syndrome.” In Glucose Tolerance, edited by Sureka
Chackrewarthy. Rijeka: In Tech., 2012.
Kumar, A., Influence of radish consumption on urinary calcium oxalate excretion, Nepal Med Coll
J. 2004;6(1):41-4
Kumar, R. D. and Oommen, O. V., Stevia rebaudiana Bertani does not produce female reproductive
toxic effect: Study in Swiss albino mouse, J Endocrinol Reprod. 2008;12(1):57-60
Kumar, S., et al., Clinical complications of kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) consumption,
Nutrition. 2013;29(6):821-7
Kunyanga, C. N., et al., Antioxidant and type 2 diabetes related functional properties of phytic acid
extract from Kenyan local food ingredients: effects of traditional processing methods , Ecol Food
Nutr. 2011;50(5):452-71
Kunzelmann, K., et al., Effects of dietary lectins on ion transport in epithelia, Br J Pharmacol.
2004;142(8):1219-26
Lähdeaho, M. L., et al., Small-bowel mucosal changes and antibody responses after low-and
moderate-dose gluten challenge in celiac disease, BMC Gastroenterol. 2011;11:129
Lajolo, F. M. and Genovese, M. I., Nutritional significance of lectins and enzyme inhibitors from
legumes, J Agric Food Chem. 2002;50(22):6592-8
Lane, J. D., et al., Caffeine effects on cardiovascular and neuroendocrine responses to acute
psychosocial stress and their relationship to level of habitual caffeine consumption, Psychosom
Med. 1990;52(3):320-36
Lane, J. D., et al., Caffeine affects cardiovascular and neuroendocrine activation at work and
home, Psychosom Med. 2002;64(4):595-603
Lange, J. N., et al., The impact of dietary calcium and oxalate ratios on stone risk, Urology.
2012;79(6):1226-9
Lavelle, E. C., et al., The identification of plant lectins with mucosal adjuvant activity,
Immunology. 2001;102(1):77-86
Lebreton, C., et al., Interactions among secretory immunoglobulin A, CD71, and transglutaminase-
2 affect permeability of intestinal epithelial cells to gliadin peptides, Gastroenterology.
2012;143(3):698-707.e1-4
Lee, M. and Kowdley, K. V., Alcohol’s effect on other chronic liver diseases, Clin Liver Dis.
2012;16(4):827-37
Lee, S. J., et al., Saponins from soybean and mung bean inhibit the antigen specific activation of
helper T cells by blocking cell cycle progression, Biotechnol Lett. 2013;35(2):165-73
Lei, H. Y. and Chang, C. P., Lectin of Concanavalin A as an anti-hepatoma therapeutic agent, J
Biomed Sci. 2009;16(1):10
Leng-Peschlow, E., Interference of dietary fibres with gastrointestinal enzymes in vitro, Digestion.
1989;44(4):200-10
Leoni, S. G., et al., Regulation of thyroid oxidative state by thioredoxin reductase has a crucial
role in thyroid responses to iodide excess, Mol Endocrinol. 2011;25(11):1924-35
Levi, J., et al., Acute disruption of leptin signaling in vivo leads to increased insulin levels and
insulin resistance, Endocrinology. 2011;152(9):3385-95
Levitan, E. B., et al., Dietary glycemic index, dietary glycemic load, blood lipids, and C-reactive
protein, Metabolism. 2008;57:437-443
Li, Y., et al., Age-dependent decreases in DNA methyltransferase levels and low transmethylation
micronutrient levels synergize to promote overexpression of genes implicated in autoimmunity and
acute coronary syndromes, Exp Gerontol. 2010;45(4):312-22
Li, Y., et al., Administration of ghrelin improves inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis
during and after non-alcoholic fatty liver disease development, Endocrine. 2013;43(2):376-86
Liener, I. E., Implications of antinutritional components in soybean foods, Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr.
1994;34:31-67
Lin, P. H., et al., Glycemic index and glycemic load are associated with some cardiovascular risk
factors among the PREMIER study participants, Food Nutr Res. 2012;56
     Lipkin, M., et al., Cell proliferation kinetics in the gastrointestinal tract of man. I. Cell
renewal in colon and rectum, J Clin Invest. 1963;42(6):767-776
Liu, H. and Heaney, A. P., Refined fructose and cancer, Expert Opin Ther Targets.
2011;15(9):1049-59
Liu, T., et al., Short-chain fatty acids suppress lipopolysaccharide-induced production of nitric
oxide and proinflammatory cytokines through inhibition of NF-κB pathway in RAW264.7 cells,
Inflammation. 2012;35(5):1676-84
Lochner, N., et al., Wheat germ agglutinin binds to the epidermal growth factor receptor of
artificial Caco-2 membranes as detected by silver nanoparticle enhanced fluorescence, Pharm.
Res. 2003;20:833-839
Lohi, S., et al., Increasing prevalence of coeliac disease over time, Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2007;26(9):1217-25
Long, K. Z., et al., Vitamin A supplementation modifies the association between mucosal innate and
adaptive immune responses and resolution of enteric pathogen infections , Am J Clin Nutr.
2011;93(3):578-585
Lopez-Garcia, E., et al., Consumption of (n-3) fatty acids is related to plasma biomarkers of
inflammation and endothelial activation in women, J Nutr. 2004;134:1806-1811
Lord, G. M., et al., Leptin modulates the T-cell immune response and reverses starvation-induced
immunosuppression, Nature. 1998;394(6696):897-901
Louie, J. C., et al., Higher regular fat dairy consumption is associated with lower incidence of
metabolic syndrome but not type 2 diabetes, Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;23(9):816-21
Lovallo, W. R., et al., Stress-like adrenocorticotropin responses to caffeine in young healthy men ,
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1996;55:365-9
Lovallo, W. R. et al., Caffeine stimulation of cortisol secretion across the waking hours in relation
to caffeine intake levels, Psychosom Med. 2005;67:734-739
Lu, B., et al., Alcohol consumption and markers of inflammation in women with preclinical
rheumatoid arthritis, Arthritis Rheum. 2010;62(12):3554-9
Luciani, A., et al., Lysosomal accumulation of gliadin p31-43 peptide induces oxidative stress and
tissue transglutaminase-mediated PPARgamma downregulation in intestinal epithelial cells and
coeliac mucosa, Gut. 2010;59(3):311-9
Lutsey, P. L., et al., Dietary intake and the development of the metabolic syndrome: the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study, Circulation. 2008;117(6):754-61
Ma, Y., et al., Association between dietary fiber and markers of systemic inflammation in the
Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study, Nutrition. 2008;24(10):941-9
Mäkinen, K. K., Effect of long-term, peroral administration of sugar alcohols on man, Swed Dent
J. 1984;8(3):113-24
Malaisse, W. J., et al., Effects of artificial sweeteners on insulin release and cationic fluxes in rat
pancreatic islets, Cell Signal. 1998;10(10):727-33
Malpuech-Brugère, C., et al., Accelerated thymus involution in magnesium-deficient rats is related
to enhanced apoptosis and sensitivity to oxidative stress, Br J Nutr. 1999;81(5):405-11
Mamone, G., et al., Identification of a peptide from alpha-gliadin resistant to digestive enzymes:
implications for celiac disease, J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2007;855(2):236-
41
Mamone, G., et al., Proteomic analysis in allergy and intolerance to wheat products , Expert Rev
Proteomics. 2011;8(1):95-115
Massey, L. K. and Kynast-Gales, S. A., Diets with either beef or plant proteins reduce risk of
calcium oxalate precipitation in patients with a history of calcium kidney stones., J Am Diet
Assoc. 2001;101(3):326-31
Matarese, G., Leptin and the immune system: how nutritional status influences the immune
response, Eur Cytokine Netw. 2000;11(1):7-14
Matsuda T., et al., Inhibitory effect of vitamin K(2) on interleukin-1beta-stimulated proliferation of
human osteoblasts, Biol Pharm Bull. 2010;33(5):804-8
Mattioli, L. F., et al., Effects of intragastric fructose and dextrose on mesenteric microvascular
inflammation and postprandial hyperemia in the rat, JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr.
2011;35(2):223-8
Matysiak-Budnik, T., et al., Alterations of the intestinal transport and processing of gliadin
peptides in celiac disease, Gastroenterology. 2003;125(3):696-707
Matysiak-Budnik, T., et al., Secretory IgA mediates retrotranscytosis of intact gliadin peptides via
the transferrin receptor in celiac disease, J Exp Med. 2008;205(1):143-154
Mazumdar, K., et al., Visualization of transepithelial passage of the immunogenic 33-residue
peptide from alpha-2 gliadin in gluten-sensitive macaques, PLoS One. 2010;5(4):e10228
Mazzei Planas, G. and Kuć, J., Contraceptive properties of stevia rebaudiana, Science.
1968;162(3857):1007
Mekary, R. A., et al., Joint association of glycemic load and alcohol intake with type 2 diabetes
incidence in women, Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;94(6):1525-32
Melis, M. S., Chronic administration of aqueous extract of stevia rebaudiana in rats: renal effects,
J Ethnopharmacol. 1995;47(3):129-134
Melis, M. S., Effects of chronic administration of stevia rebaudiana on fertility in rats, J
Ethnopharmacol. 1999;67(2):157-161
Menendez, C., et al., Retinoic acid and vitamin D(3) powerfully inhibit in vitro leptin secretion by
human adipose tissue, J Endocrinol. 2001;170(2):425-31
Mente, A., et al., A systematic review of the evidence supporting a causal link between dietary
factors and coronary heart disease, Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(7):659-69
Merlino, L. A., et al., Vitamin D intake is inversely associated with rheumatoid arthritis: results
from the Iowa Women’s Health Study, Arthritis Rheum. 2004;50(1):72-7
Miceli, E., et al., Common features of patients with autoimmune atrophic gastritis, Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;10(7):812-4
Miles, E. A. and Calder, P. C., Influence of marine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on immune
function and a systematic review of their effects on clinical outcomes in rheumatoid arthritis, Br J
Nutr. 2012;107(Suppl 2):S171-84
Moriguchi, S. and Muraga, M., Vitamin E and immunity, Vitam Horm. 2000;59:305-36
Moriya, M., et al., Vitamin K2 ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in Lewis
rats, J Neuroimmunol. 2005;170(1-2):11-20
Morrow, W. J., et al., Immunobiology of the tomatine adjuvant, Vaccine. 2004;22(19):2380-4
Moshfegh, A. J., et al., Presence of inulin and oligofructose in the diets of Americans, J Nutr.
1999;129(7 Suppl):1407S-11S
Muskiet, F. A., et al., Is docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) essential? Lessons from DHA status
regulation, our ancient diet, epidemiology and randomized controlled trials, J Nutr.
2004;134(1):183-186
Naik, E, and Dixit, V. M., Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species drive proinflammatory cytokine
production, J Exp Med. 2011;208(3):417-20
Nakajima, H., et al., Clear association between serum levels of adipokines and T-helper 17-related
cytokines in patients with psoriasis, Clin Exp Dermatol. 2013;38(1):66-70
Nashold, F. E., et al., Estrogen controls vitamin D3-mediated resistance to experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by controlling vitamin D3 metabolism and receptor expression, J
Immunol. 2009;183(6):3672-81
Nasi, A., et al., Proteomic approaches to study structure, functions and toxicity of legume seeds
lectins. Perspectives for the assessment of food quality and safety, J Proteomics. 2009;72(3):527-
38
Nass, R. M., et al., Ghrelin and growth hormone: story in reverse , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010;107(19):8501-2
Neuhouser, M. L., et al., A low-glycemic load diet reduces serum C-reactive protein and modestly
increases adiponectin in overweight and obese adults, J Nutr. 2012;142:369-374
Nilsson, H., et al., Effects of hyperosmotic stress on cultured airway epithelial cells , Cell Tissue
Res. 2007;330(2):257-69
Nilsson, M., et al., Glycemia and insulinemia in healthy subjects after lactose-equivalent meals of
milk and other food proteins: the role of plasma amino acids and incretins , Am J Clin Nutr.
2004;80(5):1246-53
Nishikawa, M., et al., Electrical charge on protein regulates its absorption from the rat small
intestine, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002;282(4):G711-9
Nolan, L. A., et al., Chronic iodine deprivation attenuates stress-induced and diurnal variation in
corticosterone secretion in female Wistar rats, J Neuroendocrinol 2000;12:1149-1159
Offor, C. E., et al., Analysis of the antinutrients levels in staple food crops in three different local
government areas of Ebonyi State, Nigeria, Continental J. Food Science and Technology.
2011;5(1):26-30
Ohba, H., et al., Cytoagglutination and cytotoxicity of wheat germ agglutinin isolectins against
normal lymphocytes and cultured leukemia cell lines; relationship between structure and
biological activity, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 2003;1619:144-150
Ohno, Y., et al., Effect of lectins on the transport of food ingredients in Caco-2 cell cultures,
Biofactors. 2004;21(1-4):399-401
Oke, O. L., edited by J. Redhead, and Hussain, M. A,.Roots, tubers, plantains and bananas in
human nutrition -toxic substances and antinutritional factors. (FAO Food and Nutrition Series,
No. 24). Available from www.fao.org/docrep/t0207e/T0207E08.htm
O’Keefe, J. H., et al., Dietary strategies for improving post-prandial glucose, lipids, inflammation,
and cardiovascular health, J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51(3):249-55
Oleszczuk, J., et al., Biological effects of conjugated linoleic acids supplementation, Pol J Vet Sci.
2012;15(2):403-8
Oliveira-Filho, R. M., et al., Chronic administration of aqueous extract of stevia rebaudiana
(Bert.) Bertoni in rats: endocrine effects, Gen Pharmacol. 1989;20(2):187-91
Onal, H., et al., Effects of selenium supplementation in the early stage of autoimmune thyroiditis in
childhood: an open-label pilot study, J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25(7-8):639-44
Onkamo, P., et al., Worldwide increase in incidence of type I diabetes -the analysis of the data on
published incidence trends, Diabetologia. 1999;42(12):1395-403
Otero, M., et al., Towards a pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory emerging role of leptin ,
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006;45(8):944-50
Pae, M., et al., Dietary supplementation with high dose of epigallocatechin-3-gallate promotes
inflammatory response in mice, J Nutr Biochem. 2012;23(6):526-31
Page, K. A., et al., Effects of fructose vs glucose on regional cerebral blood flow in brain regions
involved with appetite and reward pathways, JAMA. 2013;309(1):63-70
Park, M. K., et al., Retinal attenuates inflammatory arthritis by reciprocal regulation of IL-17-
producing T cells and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells and the inhibition of osteoclastogenesis,
Immunol Lett. 2012;148(1):59-68
Pashkunova-Martic, I., et al., Lectin conjugates as biospecific contrast agents for MRI. Coupling of
Lycopersicon esculentum agglutinin to linear water-soluble DTPA-loaded oligomers, Mol Imaging
Biol. 2011;13(3):432-42
Patrick, L., Iodine: deficiency and therapeutic considerations, Altern Med Rev. 2008;13(2):116-
127
Payne, A. N., et al., Gut microbial adaptation to dietary consumption of fructose, artificial
sweeteners and sugar alcohols: implications for host-microbe interactions contributing to obesity,
Obes Rev. 2012;13(9):799-809
Peelman, F., et al., Leptin: linking adipocyte metabolism with cardiovascular and autoimmune
diseases, Prog Lipid Res. 2004;43(4):283-301
Peelman, F., et al., Leptin, immune responses and autoimmune disease. Perspectives on the use of
leptin antagonists, Curr Pharm Des. 2005;11(4):539-48
Pepino, M. Y. and Bourne, C., Non-nutritive sweeteners, energy balance, and glucose homeostasis,
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2011;14(4):391-5
Percival, S. S., Copper and immunity, Am J Clin Nutr. 1998;67(5 Suppl):1064S-1068S
Pereira, T. C., et al., Research on zinc blood levels and nutritional status in adolescents with
autoimmune hepatitis, Arq Gastroenterol. 2011;48(1):62-5
Perricone, C., et al., Glutathione: a key player in autoimmunity, Autoimmun Rev. 2009;8(8):697-
701
Peschken, C. A. and Hitchon, C. A., Rising prevalence of systemic autoimmune rheumatic disease:
increased awareness, increased disease or increased survival? , Arthritis Res Ther. 2012;14(Suppl
3):A20
Pestka, J. J., N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and autoimmune-mediated glomerulonephritis,
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2010;82(4-6):251-8
Petersen, E., et al., Erythritol triggers expression of virulence traits in Brucella melitensis,
Microbes Infect. 2013;15(6-7):440-9
Pischon, T., Habitual dietary intake of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids in relation to inflammatory markers
among US men and women, Circulation. 2003;108(2):155-60
Piwkowska, A., et al., High glucose concentration affects the oxidant-antioxidant balance in
cultured mouse podocytes, J Cell Biochem. 2011;112(6):1661-72
Polat, G., et al., Levels of malondialdehyde, glutathione and ascorbic acid in idiopathic
thrombocytopaenic purpura, East Afr Med J. 2002;79(8):446-9
Polyák, E., et al., Effects of artificial sweeteners on body weight, food and drink intake, Acta
Physiol Hung. 2010;97(4):401-7
Prabhu, H. R., Lipid peroxidation in culinary oils subjected to thermal stress, Indian J Clin
Biochem. 2000;15(1):1-5
Prasad, A. S., Zinc in human health: effect of zinc on immune cells, Mol. Med. 2008;14(5-6):353-7
Prentice, A. M., The thymus: a barometer of malnutrition, Br J Nutr. 1999;81(5):345-7
Purohit, V., et al., Alcohol, intestinal bacterial growth, intestinal permeability to endotoxin, and
medical consequences, Alcohol. 2008;42(5):349-361
Pusztai, A., et al., Antinutritive effects of wheat-germ agglutinin and other N-acetylglucosamine-
specific lectins, Br J Nutr. 1993;70(1):313-21
Pusztai, A., et al., Inhibition of starch digestion by alpha-amylase inhibitor reduces the efficiency
of utilization of dietary proteins and lipids and retards the growth of rats , J Nutr.
1995;125(6):1554-62
Pyleris, E., et al., The prevalence of overgrowth by aerobic bacteria in the small intestine by small
bowel culture: relationship with irritable bowel syndrome, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(5):1321-9
Ramadan, R., et al., The antioxidant role of paraoxonase 1 and vitamin E in three autoimmune
diseases, Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2013;26(1):2-7
Rayman, M. P., Selenium and human health, Lancet. 2012;379(9822):1256-68
Real, A., et al., Molecular and immunological characterization of gluten proteins isolated from
oat cultivars that differ in toxicity for celiac disease, PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e48365
Rebello, S. A., et al., Coffee and tea consumption in relation to inflammation and basal glucose
metabolism in a multi-ethnic Asian population: a cross-sectional study, Nutr J. 2011;10:61
Reddy, N. R. and Sathe, S. K. eds., Food Phytates. Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC, 2002
Reed, J. C., et al., Effect of wheat germ agglutinin on the interleukin pathway of human T
lymphocyte activation, J. Immunol. 1985;134:314-323
Reimer, R. A., et al., Satiety hormone and metabolomic response to an intermittent high energy
diet differs in rats consuming long-term diets high in protein or prebiotic fiber , J Proteome Res.
2012;11(8):4065-74
Rescigno, M. and Di Sabatino, A., Dendritic cells in intestinal homeostasis and disease, J Clin
Invest. 2009;119(9):2441-2450
Ritz, E., et al., Phosphate additives in food: a health risk, Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2012;109(4):49-55
Rolls, B. J., Effects of intense sweeteners on hunger, food intake, and body weight: a review, Am J
Clin Nutr. 1991;53(4):872-8
Romeo, J., et al., Immunomodulatory effect of fibres, probiotics and synbiotics in different life-
stages, Nutr Hosp. 2010;25(3):341-9
Romon, M., et al., Leptin response to carbohydrate or fat meal and association with subsequent
satiety and energy intake, Am J Physiol. 1999;277(5 Pt 1):E855-61
Roth, E. B., et al., Biochemical and immuno-pathological aspects of tissue transglutaminase in
coeliac disease, Autoimmunity. 2003;36(4):221-6
Rothe, M., et al., Impact of nutritional factors on the proteome of intestinal Escherichia coli:
induction of oxyr-dependent proteins AhpF and Dps by a lactose-rich diet, Appl Environ
Microbiol. 2012;78(10):3580-3591
Rubí, B., Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) deficiency might contribute to the onset of type I diabetes,
Med Hypotheses. 2012;78(1):179-82
Rubio-Tapia, A., Mucosal recovery and mortality in adults with celiac disease after treatment with
a gluten-free diet, Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105(6):1412-20
Rutherfurd, S. M. and Moughan, P. J., Determination of sulfur amino acids in foods as related to
bioavailability, J AOAC Int. 2008;91(4):907-13
Sakaue, M., et al., Vitamin K has the potential to protect neurons from methylmercury-induced cell
death in vitro, J Neurosci Res. 2011;89(7):1052-8
Sangiao-Alvarellos, S. and Cordido, F., Effect of ghrelin on glucose-insulin homeostasis:
therapeutic implications, Int J Pept. 2010:Article ID 234709
Sanz, A., et al., Carbohydrate restriction does not change mitochondrial free radical generation
and oxidative DNA damage, J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2006;38(5-6):327-33
Saron, M. L., et al., Nutritional status of patients with biliary atresia and autoimmune hepatitis
related to serum levels of vitamins A, D and E, Arq Gastroenterol. 2009;46(1):62-8
Sarwar, G. and Brulé, D., Assessment of the uricogenic potential of processed foods based on the
nature and quantity of dietary purines, Prog Food Nutr Sci. 1991;15(3):159-81
Schirmer, S. H., et al., Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on postprandial triglycerides and monocyte
activation, Atherosclerosis. 2012;225(1):166-72
Schlesinger, N., Dietary factors and hyperuricaemia, Curr Pharm Des. 2005;11(32):4133-8
Schvartzman, J. B., et al., Cytological effects of some medicinal plants used in the control of
fertility, Experientia. 1977;33(5):663-5
Sekirov, I., et al., Gut microbiota in health and disease, Physiol Rev, 2010;90( 3):859-904
Seshadri, P., et al., A randomized study comparing the effects of a low-carbohydrate diet and a
conventional diet on lipoprotein subfractions and C-reactive protein levels in patients with severe
obesity, Am J Med. 2004;117:398-405
Setola, E., et al., Fasting hyperinsulinemia associates with increased sub-clinical inflammation in
first-degree relatives normal glucose tolerant women independently of the metabolic syndrome ,
Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2009;25(7):639-46
Shaikh, M. A., et al., Frequency of anaemia in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus at
tertiary care hospitals, J Pak Med Assoc. 2010;60(10):822-5
Shapiro, A., et al., Fructose-induced leptin resistance exacerbates weight gain in response to
subsequent high-fat feeding, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008;295(5):R1370-5
Shapira, Y., et al., Mycobacterium tuberculosis, autoimmunity, and vitamin D, Clin Rev Allergy
Immunol. 2010;38(2-3):169-77
Sheff, D. R., et al., The receptor recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early
endosomes with different sorting functions, J Cell Biol. 1999;145(1):123-39
Shi, J., et al., Saponins from edible legumes: chemistry, processing, and health benefits, J Med
Food. 2004 Spring;7(1):67-78
Shiau, S. Y. and Chang, G. W., Effects of certain dietary fibers on apparent permeability of the rat
intestine, J Nutr. 1986;116(2):223-32
Shoelson, S. E., et al., Inflammation and insulin resistance, J Clin Invest. 2006;116(7):1793-1801
Sies H., Oxidative stress: oxidants and antioxidants, Exp Physiol. 1997;82(2):291-5
Silva, M. A., et al., Increased bacterial translocation in gluten-sensitive mice is independent of
small intestinal paracellular permeability defect, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(1):38-47
Simopoulos, A. P., Human requirement for N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, Poult Sci.
2000;79(7):961-70
Simopoulos, A. P., Omega-3 fatty acids in inflammation and autoimmune diseases, J Am Coll Nutr.
2002;21(6):495-505
Simopoulos, A. P., The importance of the ratio of omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acids, Biomed
Pharmacother. 2002;56(8):365-79
Singh, M. and Krikorian, A. D. Inhibition of trypsin activity in vitro by phytate, J. Agric. Food
Chem. 1982;30(4):799-800
Siri-Tarino, P. W., et al., Saturated fat, carbohydrate, and cardiovascular disease, Am J Clin Nutr.
2010;91(3):502-9
Siri-Tarino, P. W., et al., Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies evaluating the association of
saturated fat with cardiovascular disease, Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91(3):535-46
Sjölander, A., et al., The effect of concanavalin A and wheat germ agglutinin on the ultrastructure
and permeability of rat intestine. A possible model for an intestinal allergic reaction, Int Arch
Allergy Appl Immunol. 1984;75(3):230-6
Skerritt, J. H., et al., Variation of serum and intestinal gluten antibody specificities in coeliac
disease, Clin. Exp. Immunol. 1987;68:189-199
Sluijs, I., et al., The amount and type of dairy product intake and incident type 2 diabetes: results
from the EPIC-InterAct Study, Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(2):382-90
Snoeck, V., et al., The IgA system: a comparison of structure and function in different species, Vet.
Res. 2006;37:455-467
Soares, F. L., et al., Gluten-free diet reduces adiposity, inflammation and insulin resistance
associated with the induction of PPAR-alpha and PPAR-gamma expression, J Nutr Biochem.
2013;24(6):1105-11
Somoza, V., Five years of research on health risks and benefits of Maillard reaction products: an
update, Mol Nutr Food Res. 2005;49(7):663-72
Sonestedt, E., et al., Dairy products and its association with incidence of cardiovascular disease:
the Malmö diet and cancer cohort, Eur J Epidemiol. 2011;26(8):609-18
Soop, M., et al., Euglycemic hyperinsulinemia augments the cytokine and endocrine responses to
endotoxin in humans, Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002;282(6):E1276-85
Soykan, I., et al., Clinical profiles, endoscopic and laboratory features and associated factors in
patients with autoimmune gastritis, Digestion. 2012;86(1):20-6
Staddon, J. M., et al., Evidence that tyrosine phosphorylation may increase tight junction
permeability, J. Cell Sci. 1995;108:609-619
Stenberg, P., et al., Transglutaminase and the pathogenesis of coeliac disease, Eur J Intern Med.
2008;19(2):83-91
Stephensen, C. B., Vitamin A, infection, and immune function, Annu Rev Nutr. 2001;21:167-92
Steptoe, A., et al., The effects of tea on psychophysiological stress responsivity and post-stress
recovery: a randomised double-blind trial, Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007;190(1):81-9
Sternberg, Z., et al., The prevalence of the classical and non-classical cardiovascular risk factors
in multiple sclerosis patients, CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2013;12(1):104-11
Stoika, R. S., et al., In vitro studies of activation of phagocytic cells by bioactive peptides, J.
Physiol. Pharmacol. 2002;53:675-688
Stolc, V., Stimulation of iodoproteins and thyroxine formation in human leukocytes by
phagocytosis, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1971;45:159-166
Stowe, D. F. and Camara, A. K. S., Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production in excitable
cells: modulators of mitochondrial and cell function, Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11(6):1373-
1414
Stoye, D., et al., Zinc aspartate suppresses T cell activation in vitro and relapsing experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis in SJL/J mice, Biometals. 2012;25(3):529-39
Ströhle, A., et al., Micronutrients at the interface between inflammation and infection--ascorbic
acid and calciferol. Part 2: calciferol and the significance of nutrient supplements, Inflamm
Allergy Drug Targets. 2011;10(1):64-74
Sun, Z., et al., Leptin inhibits neutrophil apoptosis in children via ERK/NF-κB-dependent
pathways, PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55249
Swidsinski, A., et al., Bacterial overgrowth and inflammation of small intestine after
carboxymethylcellulose ingestion in genetically susceptible mice, Inflamm Bowel Dis.
2009;15(3):359-64
Swystun, V. A., et al., Serine proteases decrease intestinal epithelial ion permeability by
activation of protein kinase Czeta, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009;297(1):G60-70
Tang, S., et al., Effects of purified soybean agglutinin on growth and immune function in rats, Arch
Anim Nutr. 2006;60(5):418-26
Tappy, L., et al., Fructose and metabolic diseases: new findings, new questions, Nutrition.
2010;26(11-12):1044-9
Taub, D. D., Novel connections between the neuroendocrine and immune systems: the ghrelin
immunoregulatory network, Vitam Horm. 2008;77:325-46
Tavakkoli, A., et al., Vitamin D status and concomitant autoimmunity in celiac disease, J Clin
Gastroenterol. 2013;47(6):515-9
Teff, K. L., et al., Dietary fructose reduces circulating insulin and leptin, attenuates postprandial
suppression of ghrelin, and increases triglycerides in women , J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2004;89(6):2963-72
Teixeira, T. F., et al., Potential mechanisms for the emerging link between obesity and increased
intestinal permeability, Nutr Res. 2012;32(9):637-47
Te Morenga, L., et al., Dietary sugars and body weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of
randomised controlled trials and cohort studies, BMJ. 2012;346:e7492
Teng, X., et al., More than adequate iodine intake may increase subclinical hypothyroidism and
autoimmune thyroiditis: a cross-sectional study based on two Chinese communities with different
iodine intake levels, Eur J Endocrinol. 2011;164(6):943-50
Thompson, G. R., Absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and sterols, J. Clin. Path. 1971;s3-5:85-89
Thompson, T., et al., Gluten contamination of grains, seeds, and flours in the United States: a pilot
study, J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110(6):937-40
Tlaskalová-Hogenová, H., et al., Commensal bacteria (normal microflora), mucosal immunity and
chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, Immunol Lett. 2004;93(2-3):97-108
Tobacman, J. K., Review of harmful gastrointestinal effects of carrageenan in animal experiments.
Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109(10):983-994
Torkildsen, Ø., et al., Fat-soluble vitamins as disease modulators in multiple sclerosis, Acta
Neurol Scand Suppl. 2013;196:16-23
Torralba, K. D., et al., The interplay between diet, urate transporters and the risk for gout and
hyperuricemia: current and future directions, Int J Rheum Dis. 2012;15(6):499-506
Trebino, C., et al., Impaired inflammatory and pain responses in mice lacking an inducible
prostaglandin E synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2003;100:9044-9049
Tsai, C. Y., et al., Effect of soy saponin on the growth of human colon cancer cells, World J
Gastroenterol. 2010;16(27):3371-6
Tunnicliffe, J. M. and Shearer, J., Coffee, glucose homeostasis, and insulin resistance:
physiological mechanisms and mediators, Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2008;33(6):1290-300
Turnbaugh, P. J., et al., The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic analysis in
humanized gnotobiotic mice, Sci Transl Med. 2009;1(6):6ra14
Uibo, O., et al., Serum IgA anti-gliadin antibodies in an adult population sample. High prevalence
without celiac disease, Dig. Dis. Sci. 1993;38:2034-2037
United States Department of Agriculture. “Profiling Food Consumption in America.” InAgriculture
Fact Book 2001-2002
Urban, J. D., et al., Steviol glycoside safety: is the genotoxicity database sufficient?, Food Chem
Toxicol. 2013;51:386-90
Usuki, F., et al., Post-transcriptional defects of antioxidant selenoenzymes cause oxidative stress
under methylmercury exposure, J Biol Chem. 2011;286(8):6641-9
Vaintraub, I. A., and Bulmaga, V. P., Effect of phytate on the in vitro activity of digestive
proteinases, J. Agric. Food Chem. 1999;39(5):859-861
Van Damme, E. J. M., et al., Handbook of Plant Lectins: Properties and Biomedical Applications.
West Sussex: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
van de Wal, Y., et al., Selective deamidation by tissue transglutaminase strongly enhances gliadin-
specific T cell reactivity, J Immunol. 1998;161(4):1585-8
van Dijk, S. J., et al., A saturated fatty acid-rich diet induces an obesity-linked proinflammatory
gene expression profile in adipose tissue of subjects at risk of metabolic syndrome, Am J Clin
Nutr. 2009;90:1656-1664
van Schothorst, E. M., Effects of a high-fat, low- versus high-glycemic index diet: retardation of
insulin resistance involves adipose tissue modulation, FASEB J. 2009;23(4):1092-101
Varghese, B., et al., Depletion of folate-receptor-positive macrophages leads to alleviation of
symptoms and prolonged survival in two murine models of systemic lupus erythematosus, Mol
Pharm. 2007;4(5):679-85
Vehik, K., et al., Increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes in 0- to 17-year-old Colorado youth,
Diabetes Care. 2007;30(3):503-9
Verhulst, P. J. and Depoortere, I., Ghrelin’s second life: from appetite stimulator to glucose
regulator, World J Gastroenterol. 2012;18(25):3183-95
Verma, S. and Thakur, B. K., Dramatic response to oral zinc in a case of subacute form of
generalized pustular psoriasis, Indian J Dermatol. 2012;57(4):323-4
Vojdani, A. and Tarash, I., Cross-Reaction between gliadin and different food and tissue antigens,
Food Nutr Sci. 2013;4(1):20-32
Volek, J., et al., Carbohydrate restriction has a more favorable impact on the metabolic syndrome
than a low fat diet, Lipids. 2009;44:297-309
Voltolini, C., et al., A novel antiinflammatory role for the short-chain fatty acids in human labor,
Endocrinology. 2012;153(1):395-403
Vos, M. B. and Lavine, J. E., Dietary fructose in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Hepatology.
2013;57(6):2525-31
Wang, Q., et al., Identification of intact peanut lectin in peripheral venous blood. Lancet.
1998;352:1831-2
Wang, S., et al., T cell-derived leptin contributes to increased frequency of T helper type 17 cells
in female patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Clin Exp Immunol. 2013;171(1):63-8
Wang, Z., et al., Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease,
Nature. 2011;472(7341):57-63
Warensjö, E., et al., Biomarkers of milk fat and the risk of myocardial infarction in men and
women: a prospective, matched case-control study, Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;92(1):194-202
Watt, J. and Marcus, R., Danger of carrageenan in foods and slimming recipes, Lancet.
1981;317(8215):338
Watzl, B., et al., Dietary wheat germ agglutinin modulates ovalbumin-induced immune response in
brown Norway rats, Br. J. Nutr. 2001;85:483-490
Weaver, K. L., et al., Effect of dietary fatty acids on inflammatory gene expression in healthy
humans, J Biol Chem. 2009;284(23):15400-15407
Weidig, P., et al., High glucose mediates pro-oxidant and antioxidant enzyme activities in
coronary endothelial cells, Diabetes Obes Metab. 2004;6(6):432-41
West, L. G. and Greger, J. L., In vitro studies on saponin-vitamin complexation, J Food Sci.
1978;43:1340-1341
Westerbacka, J., et al., Insulin regulation of MCP-1 in human adipose tissue of obese and lean
women, Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008;294:E841-E845
White, W. L. B., et al., Cyanogenesis in cassava: the role of hydroxynitrile lyase in root cyanide
production, Plant Physiol. 1998;116(4):1219-1225
Wirth, M., et al., Lectin-mediated drug delivery: discrimination between cytoadhesion and
cytoinvasion and evidence for lysosomal accumulation of wheat germ agglutinin in the Caco-2
model, J. Drug Target. 2002;10,439-448
Wolosker, H., et al., D-amino acids in the brain: D-serine in neurotransmission and
neurodegeneration, The FEBS Journal. 2008;275:3514-3526
Wu, C., et al., Induction of pathogenic TH17 cells by inducible salt-sensing kinase SGK1, Nature.
2013;496(7446):513-7
Wu, D., et al., Green tea EGCG, T cells, and T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases, Mol Aspects
Med. 2012;33(1):107-18
Xu, C., et al., Endoplasmic reticulum stress: cell life and death decisions, J Clin Invest.
2005;115(10):2656-64
Xue, Y., et al., Adipokines in psoriatic arthritis patients: the correlations with osteoclast
precursors and bone erosions, PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46740
Yaqoob, P., Monounsaturated fats and immune function, Braz J Med Biol Res. 1998;31(4):453-65
Yamabe, N., et al., Increase in antioxidant and anticancer effects of ginsenoside Re-lysine mixture
by Maillard reaction, Food Chem. 2013;138(2-3):876-83
Yamaguchi, M. and Weitzmann, M. N., Vitamin K2 stimulates osteoblastogenesis and suppresses
osteoclastogenesis by suppressing NF-κB activation, Int J Mol Med. 2011;27(1):3-14
Yano, M., et al., Short-term exposure of high glucose concentration induces generation of reactive
oxygen species in endothelial cells: implication for the oxidative stress associated with
postprandial hyperglycemia, Redox Rep. 2004;9(2):111-6
Yilmaz, A., et al., Trace elements and some extracellular antioxidant proteins levels in serum of
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Clin Rheumatol. 2005;24(4):331-5
Yin, X., et al., Ghrelin fluctuation, what determines its production?, Acta Biochim Biophys Sin
(Shanghai). 2009;41(3):188-97
Zampelas, A., et al., Associations between coffee consumption and inflammatory markers in
healthy persons: the ATTICA study, Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;80(4):862-7
Zevallos, V. F., et al., Variable activation of immune response by quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa
Willd.) prolamins in celiac disease, Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(2):337-44
Zgaga, L., et al., The association of dietary intake of purine-rich vegetables, sugar-sweetened
beverages and dairy with plasma urate, in a cross-sectional study, PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38123
Zhu, K. J., et al., Alcohol consumption and psoriatic risk: a meta-analysis of case-control studies, J
Dermatol. 2012;39(9):770-3
Zimmerman, M. A., et al., Butyrate suppresses colonic inflammation through HDAC1-dependent
Fas upregulation and Fas-mediated apoptosis of T cells, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol.
2012;302(12):G1405-15

Chapter 3:
Lifestyle Factors That
Contribute to Autoimmune Disease
Acevedo, E. O., et al., Cardiorespiratory responses of Hi Fit and Low Fit subjects to mental
challenge during exercise, Int J Sports Med. 2006;27(12):1013-22
Adam, T. C. and Epel, E. S., Stress, eating and the reward system, Physiol Behav. 2007;91(4):449-
58
Adcock, I. M., et al., Steroid resistance in asthma: mechanisms and treatment options, Curr.
Allergy Asthma Rep. 2008;8:171-178
Aditi, A. and Graham, D. Y., Vitamin C, gastritis, and gastric disease: a historical review and
update, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(10):2504-15
Ahima, R. S., et al., Leptin regulation of neuroendocrine systems, Front Neuroendocrinol.
2000;21(3):263-307
Ahima, R. S., Revisiting leptin’s role in obesity and weight loss, J. Clin Invest. 2008;118(7):2380-3
Assimakopoulos, S. F., et al., Enterocytes’ tight junctions: from molecules to diseases , World J
Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2011;2(6):123-137
Aygün, D., et al., Toxicity of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: a review of melatonin and
diclofenac sodium association, Histol Histopathol. 2012;27(4):417-36
Bachelez, H., et al., The use of tetracyclines for the treatment of sarcoidosis, Arch Dermatol.
2001;137(1):69-73
Bailey, M., et al., The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and viral infection, Viral Immunol.
2003;16:141-157
Barbadoro, P., et al., Fish oil supplementation reduces cortisol basal levels and perceived stress: a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial in abstinent alcoholics, Mol Nutr Food Res.
2013;57(6):1110-4
Barger, L. K., et al., Daily exercise facilitates phase delays of circadian melatonin rhythm in very
dim light, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004;286(6):R1077-84
Bates, H. E., et al., Recurrent intermittent restraint delays fed and fasting hyperglycemia and
improves glucose return to baseline levels during glucose tolerance tests in the Zucker diabetic
fatty rat: role of food intake and corticosterone, Metabolism. 2007;56(8):1065-75
Bavishi, C. and Dupont, H. L.,Systematic review: the use of proton pump inhibitors and increased
susceptibility to enteric infection, Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2011;34(11-12):1269-81
Benoit, S. C., Insulin and leptin as adiposity signals, Recent Prog Horm Res. 2004;59:267-285
Beutheu Youmba, S., et al., Methotrexate modulates tight junctions through NF-κB, MEK, and JNK
pathways, J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012;54(4):463-70
Bjarnason, I., Intestinal permeability, Gut. 1994;35(1 Suppl):S18-S22
Bollinger, T., et al., Sleep-dependent activity of T cells and regulatory T cells, Clin Exp Immunol.
2009;155(2):231-8
Borghouts, L. B. and Keizer, H. A., Exercise and insulin sensitivity: a review, Int J Sports Med.
2000;21(1):1-12
Bosy-Westphal, A., et al., Influence of partial sleep deprivation on energy balance and insulin
sensitivity in healthy women, Obes Facts. 2008;1(5):266-73
Boudjeltia K. Z., et al., Sleep restriction increases white blood cells, mainly neutrophil count, in
young healthy men: a pilot study, Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2008;4(6):1467-70
Bourne, C., et al., Emergent adverse effects of proton pump inhibitors, Presse Med.
2013;42(2):e53-62
Brody, M., et al., Mechanism of action of methotrexate: experimental evidence that methotrexate
blocks the binding of interleukin 1 beta to the interleukin 1 receptor on target cells , Eur J Clin
Chem Clin Biochem. 1993;31(10):667-74
Brown, J. D. and Siegel, J. M.,Exercise as a buffer of life stress: a prospective study of adolescent
health, Health Psychol. 1988;7(4):341-53
Bubenik, G. A., Thirty-four years since the discovery of gastrointestinal melatonin, J Physiol
Pharmacol. 2008;59(Suppl 2):33-51
Burgess. H. J. and Fogg, L. F., Individual differences in the amount and timing of salivary
melatonin secretion, PLoS One. 2008;3(8):e3055
Buske-Kirschbaum, A., Cortisol responses to stress in allergic children: interaction with the
immune response, Neuroimmunomodulation. 2009;16:325-332
Buxton, O. M., et al., Exercise elicits phase shifts and acute alterations of melatonin that vary with
circadian phase, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2003;284(3):R714-24
Capasso, F., et al., Dissociation of castor oil-induced diarrhoea and intestinal mucosal injury in
rat: effect of NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester, Br J Pharmacol. 1994;113(4):1127-30
Carlson, O., et al., Impact of reduced meal frequency without caloric restriction on glucose
regulation in healthy, normal weight middle-aged men and women, Metabolism.
2007;56(12):1729-1734
Chikanza, I. C., et al., The influence of the hormonal system on pediatric rheumatic diseases,
Rheum. Dis. Clin. North Am. 2000;26:911-925
Chrousos, G. P. and Kino, T., Glucocorticoid action networks and complex psychiatric and/or
somatic disorders, Stress. 2007;10:213-219
Chubineh, S. and Birk, J., Proton pump inhibitors: the good, the bad, and the unwanted, South Med
J. 2012;105(11):613-8
Cohen, S., et al., Chronic stress, glucocorticoid receptor resistance, inflammation, and disease
risk, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109(16):5995-9
Crispim, C. A., et al., Relationship between food intake and sleep pattern in healthy individuals, J
Clin Sleep Med. 2011;7(6):659-664
Crofford, L. J., et al., Circadian relationships between interleukin (IL)-6 and hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis hormones: failure of IL-6 to cause sustained hypercortisolism in patients
with early untreated rheumatoid arthritis, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997;82(4):1279-83
Crofford, L. J., The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in the pathogenesis of rheumatic diseases,
Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am. 2002;31:1-13
Cutolo, M., et al., Circadian rhythms: glucocorticoids and arthritis, Ann NY Acad Sci.
2006;1069:289-99
Delhanty, P. J. and van der Lely, A. J., Ghrelin and glucose homeostasis, Peptides.
2011;32(11):2309-18
Del Principe, D., et al., Defective autophagy in fibroblasts may contribute to fibrogenesis in
autoimmune processes, Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(35):3878-87
de Oliveira, E. P. and Bruni, R. C., Food-dependent, exercise-induced gastrointestinal distress , J
Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2011;8:12
Deshmukh-Taskar, P., et al., The relationship of breakfast skipping and type of breakfast consumed
with overweight/obesity, abdominal obesity, other cardiometabolic risk factors and the metabolic
syndrome in young adults. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES):
1999-2006, Public Health Nutr. 2013;16(11):2073-2082
Dhabhar, F. S., Enhancing versus suppressive effects of stress on immune function: implications
for immunoprotection and immunopathology, Neuroimmunomodulation. 2009;16(5):300-17
Dhabhar, F. S. and McEwen, B. S., Acute stress enhances while chronic stress suppresses immune
function in vivo: a potential role for leukocyte trafficking, Brain Behav Immun. 1997;11:286-306
Dixit, V. D., et al., Controlled meal frequency without caloric restriction alters peripheral blood
mononuclear cell cytokine production, J Inflamm (Lond). 2011;8(6)
Djurhuus, C. B., et al., Effects of cortisol on lipolysis and regional interstitial glycerol levels in
humans, Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002;283(1):E172-7
Donga, E., et al., A single night of partial sleep deprivation induces insulin resistance in multiple
metabolic pathways in healthy subjects, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(6):2963-8
Du, Y. J., et al., Airway inflammation and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity in
asthmatic adults with depression, J Asthma. 2013;50(3):274-81
Dubourg, G., et al., High-level colonisation of the human gut by Verrucomicrobia following broad-
spectrum antibiotic treatment, Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013;41(2):149-55
Enriori, P. J., et al., Leptin Resistance and Obesity, Obesity. 2006;14, 254S-258S
Epel, E., et al., Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2004;101:17312-17315
Esteban, S., et al., Effect of orally administered L-tryptophan on serotonin, melatonin, and the
innate immune response in the rat, Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;267(1-2):39-46
Farack, U. M. and Nell, G.,Mechanism of action of diphenolic laxatives: the role of adenylate
cyclase and mucosal permeability, Digestion. 1984;30(3):191-4
Fatouros, I., et al., Acute resistance exercise results in catecholaminergic rather than
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stimulation during exercise in young men, Stress.
2010;13(6):461-8
Ferris, H. A., and Kahn, C. R., New mechanisms of glucocorticoid-induced insulin resistance: make
no bones about it, J Clin Invest. 2012;122(11):3854-3857
Fichter, M. M., et al., Weight loss causes neuroendocrine disturbances: experimental study in
healthy starving subjects, Psychiatry Res. 1986;17(1):61-72
Finger, B. C., et al., High-fat diet selectively protects against the effects of chronic social stress in
the mouse, Neuroscience. 2011;192:351-60
Fleshner, M., et al., The neurobiology of the stress-resistant brain, Stress. 2011;14(5):498-502
Freidenreich, D. J. and Volek, J. S., Immune responses to resistance exercise , Exerc Immunol Rev.
2012;18:8-41
Frey, D. J., et al., The effects of 40 hours of total sleep deprivation on inflammatory markers in
healthy young adults, Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21(8):1050-7
Garner, S. E., et al., Minocycline for acne vulgaris: efficacy and safety, Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2012;8:CD002086
Gathercole, L. L., et al., Regulation of lipogenesis by glucocorticoids and insulin in human adipose
tissue, PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26223
Geboes, K., Laxatives and intestinal epithelial cells: a morphological study of epithelial cell
damage and proliferation, Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg. 1995;57(1):51-74
Giraldo, E., et al., Influence of gender and oral contraceptives intake on innate and inflammatory
response. Role of neuroendocrine factors, Mol Cell Biochem. 2008;313(1-2):147-53
Glaser, R. and Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Stress-induced immune dysfunction: implications for health,
Nat Rev Immunol. 2005;5:243-251
Glaser, R., et al., Evidence for a shift in the Th1 to Th2 cytokine response associated with chronic
stress and aging, J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56:M477-M482
Goichot, B., et al., Effect of the shift of the sleep-wake cycle on three robust endocrine markers of
the circadian clock, Am J Physiol. 1998;275(2 Pt 1):E243-8
Gold, S. M., et al., The role of stress-response systems for the pathogenesis and progression of
MS, Trends Immunol. 2005;26:644-652
Gorbach, S. L., Bismuth therapy in gastrointestinal diseases, Gastroenterology. 1990;99(3):863-75
Gouin, J.-P., et al., Marital behavior, oxytocin, vasopressin, and wound healing,
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2010;35(7):1082-1090
Gray, P., et al., Fish oil supplementation augments post-exercise immune function in young males,
Brain Behav Immun. 2012;26(8):1265-72
Gupta, R. W., et al., Histamine-2 receptor blockers alter the fecal microbiota in premature infants ,
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2013;56(4):397-400
Hamada, K., et al., Zonula Occludens-1 alterations and enhanced intestinal permeability in
methotrexate-treated rats, Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2010;66(6):1031-8
Harpaz, I., et al., Chronic exposure to stress predisposes to higher autoimmune susceptibility in
C57BL/6 mice: glucocorticoids as a double-edged sword, Eur J Immunol. 2013;43(3):758-69
Hejazi, K. and Hosseini, S. R., Influence of selected exercise on serum immunoglobulin,
testosterone and cortisol in semi-endurance elite runners, Asian J Sports Med. 2012;3(3):185-92
Hennebelle, M., et al., Influence of omega-3 fatty acid status on the way rats adapt to chronic
restraint stress, PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42142
Heslop, P., et al., Sleep duration and mortality: The effect of short or long sleep duration on
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in working men and women, Sleep Med. 2002;3(4):305-14
Higashimoto, M., et al., Tissue-dependent preventive effect of metallothionein against DNA damage
in dyslipidemic mice under repeated stresses of fasting or restraint , Life Sci. 2009;84(17-18):569-
75
Hirotsu, C., et al., Sleep loss and cytokines levels in an experimental model of psoriasis, PLoS One.
2012;7(11)
Holt-Lunstad, J., et al., Influence of a “warm touch” support enhancement intervention among
married couples on ambulatory blood pressure, oxytocin, alpha amylase, and cortisol , Psychosom
Med. 2008;70(9):976-85
Holt-Lunstad, J., et al., The influence of depressive symptomatology and perceived stress on plasma
and salivary oxytocin before, during and after a support enhancement intervention,
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011;36(8):1249-56
James, F. O., et al., Circadian rhythms of melatonin, cortisol, and clock gene expression during
simulated night shift work, Sleep. 2007;30(11):1427-1436,S1
Jefferies, W. M., Cortisol and immunity, Med Hypotheses. 1991;34(3):198-208
Johnston A., et al., The anti-inflammatory action of methotrexate is not mediated by lymphocyte
apoptosis, but by the suppression of activation and adhesion molecules, Clin Immunol.
2005;114(2):154-63
Juillerat, P., et al., Drugs that inhibit gastric acid secretion may alter the course of inflammatory
bowel disease, Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2012;36(3):239-47
Kato, H., et al., Inappropriate use of loperamide worsens Clostridium difficile-associated
diarrhoea, J Hosp Infect. 2008;70(2):194-5
Klein, R., et al., Tumor necrosis factor inhibitor-associated dermatomyositis, Arch Dermatol.
2010;146(7):780-4
Kouri, V. P., et al., Circadian timekeeping is disturbed in rheumatoid arthritis at molecular level,
PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54049
Kumar, J., et al., Differential effects of chronic social stress and fluoxetine on meal patterns in
mice, Appetite. 2013;64:81-8
Lambert, G. P., Stress-induced gastrointestinal barrier dysfunction and its inflammatory effects, J
Anim Sci. 2009;87(14 Suppl):E101-8
Lambert, G. P., et al., Effect of aspirin dose on gastrointestinal permeability, Int J Sports Med.
2012;33(6):421-5
Lamprecht, M., et al., Probiotic supplementation affects markers of intestinal barrier, oxidation,
and inflammation in trained men: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial, J Int
Soc Sports Nutr. 2012;9(1):45
Lee, H. J., et al., Oxytocin: the great facilitator of life, Prog Neurobiol. 2009;88(2):127-151
Lehrer S, et al., Insufficient sleep associated with increased breast cancer mortality, Sleep Med.
2013;14(5):469
Leidy, H. J., et al., Beneficial effects of a higher-protein breakfast on the appetitive, hormonal, and
neural signals controlling energy intake regulation in overweight/obese, “breakfast-skipping,”
late-adolescent girls, Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;97(4):677-88
Lifschitz, C. H. and Mahoney, D. H.,Low-dose methotrexate-induced changes in intestinal
permeability determined by polyethylene glycol polymers, J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
1989;9(3):301-6
Linsky, A., et al., Proton pump inhibitors and risk for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection,
Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(9):772-8
Liu, W., et al., Inhibition of lysosomal enzyme activities by proton pump inhibitors, J Gastroenterol.
2013 [Epub ahead of print]
Lovallo, W. R., et al., Caffeine stimulation of cortisol secretion across the waking hours in
relation to caffeine intake levels, Psychosom Med. 2005;67(5):734-739
Lucassen E. A., et al., Interacting epidemics? Sleep curtailment, insulin resistance, and obesity,
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2012;1264(1):110-34
Ma, T. Y., et al., Mechanism of extracellular calcium regulation of intestinal epithelial tight
junction permeability: role of cytoskeletal involvement, Microsc Res Tech. 2000;51:156-168
Macfarlane, D. P., et al., Glucocorticoids and fatty acid metabolism in humans: fuelling fat
redistribution in the metabolic syndrome, J Endocrinol. 2008;197(2):189-204
Maggio, M., et al., Proton pump inhibitors and risk of 1-year mortality and rehospitalization in
older patients discharged from acute care hospitals, JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173(7):518-23
Marchesi, J. R., Prokaryotic and eukaryotic diversity of the human gut, Adv Appl Microbiol.
2010;72:43-62
Marques, A. H., et al., Glucocorticoid dysregulations and their clinical correlates. From receptors
to therapeutics, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2009;1179:1-18
Marshall, J. C., The gut as a potential trigger of exercise-induced inflammatory responses, Can J
Physiol Pharmacol. 1998;76(5):479-84
Mastorakos, G., et al., Exercise and the Stress System, Hormones. 2005;4(2):73-89
Mastorakos, G., et al., Inappropriately normal plasma ACTH and cortisol concentrations in the
face of increased circulating interleukin-6 concentration in exercise in patients with sarcoidosis ,
Stress. 2013;16(2):202-10
Maton, P. N. and Burton, M. E., Antacids revisited: a review of their clinical pharmacology and
recommended therapeutic use, Drugs. 1999;57(6):855-70
Mawdsley, J. E. and Rampton, D. S., Psychological stress in IBD: new insights into pathogenic and
therapeutic implications, Gut. 2005;54:1481-1491
McEwen, B. S., et al., The role of adrenocorticoids as modulators of immune function in health
and disease: neural, endocrine and immune interactions, Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1997;23(1-
2):79-133
McGregor, A., et al., Fulminant amoebic colitis following loperamide use, J Travel Med.
2007;14(1):61-2
Meier-Ewert H. K., et al., Effect of sleep loss on C-reactive protein, an inflammatory marker of
cardiovascular risk, J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43(4):678-83
Melamud, L., et al., Melatonin dysregulation, sleep disturbances and fatigue in multiple sclerosis,
J Neurol Sci. 2012;314(1-2):37-40
Moeser, A. J., et al., Comparison of the chloride channel activator lubiprostone and the oral
laxative Polyethylene Glycol 3350 on mucosal barrier repair in ischemic-injured porcine
intestine, World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14(39):6012-7
Mozzanica, N., et al., Plasma melatonin levels in psoriasis, Acta Derm Venereol. 1988;68(4):312-6
Miyazaki, T., et al., Phase-advance shifts of human circadian pacemaker are accelerated by
daytime physical exercise, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2001;281(1):R197-205
Natarajan, R., et al., Melatonin pathway genes are associated with progressive subtypes and
disability status in multiple sclerosis among Finnish patients, J Neuroimmunol. 2012;250(1-
2):106-10
Nater, U. M., et al., Determinants of the diurnal course of salivary alpha-amylase,
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2007;32(4):392-401
Neeck, G. and Crofford, L. J.,Neuroendocrine perturbations in fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue
syndrome, Rheum. Dis. Clin. North Am. 2000;26:989-1002
Newton, D. F., et al., Effects of antibiotics on bacterial species composition and metabolic
activities in chemostats containing defined populations of human gut microorganisms , Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2013;57(5):2016-25
Nishio, H., et al., Repeated fasting stress causes activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(ERK/JNK) in rat liver, Hepatology. 2002;36(1):72-80
Oishi, K. and Itoh, N., Disrupted daily light-dark cycle induces the expression of hepatic
gluconeogenic regulatory genes and hyperglycemia with glucose intolerance in mice, Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2013;432(1):111-5
Palma, B. D., et al., Effects of sleep deprivation on the development of autoimmune disease in an
experimental model of systemic lupus erythematosus, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol.
2006;291(5):R1527-32
Palma, B. D. and Tufik, S., Increased disease activity is associated with altered sleep architecture
in an experimental model of systemic lupus erythematosus, Sleep. 2010;33(9):1244-8
Papathanassoglou, E. D. and Mpouzika, M. D.,Interpersonal touch: physiological effects in critical
care, Biol Res Nurs. 2012;14(4):431-43
Parker, A. J., et al., The neuroendocrinology of chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia .
Psychol. Med. 2001;31:1331-1345
Passos, G. S., et al., Effects of moderate aerobic exercise training on chronic primary insomnia,
Sleep Med. 2011;12(10):1018-27
Pereira, B., et al., Hormonal regulation of superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione
peroxidase activities in rat macrophages, Biochem Pharmacol. 1995;50 (12):2093-2098
Perez-Alvarez, R., et al., Interstitial lung disease induced or exacerbated by TNF-targeted
therapies: analysis of 122 cases, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2011;41(2):256-64
Peschke, E., et al., The insulin-melatonin antagonism: studies in the LEW.1AR1-iddm rat (an
animal model of human type 1 diabetes mellitus), Diabetologia. 2011;54(7):1831-40
Peschke, E., et al., Catecholamines are the key for explaining the biological relevance of insulin-
melatonin antagonisms in type 1 and type 2 diabetes, J Pineal Res. 2012;52(4):389-96
Peskar, B. M., et al., Role of cyclooxygenase-2 in gastric mucosal defense, Life Sci. 2001;69(25-
26):2993-3003
Peters, H., et al., Potential benefits and hazards of physical activity and exercise on the
gastrointestinal tract, Gut. 2001;48(3):435-439
Petrovsky, N., et al., Diurnal rhythms of pro-inflammatory cytokines: regulation by plasma cortisol
and therapeutic implications, Cytokine. 1998;10(4):307-12
Ploeger, H. E., et al., The effects of acute and chronic exercise on inflammatory markers in
children and adults with a chronic inflammatory disease: a systematic review , Exerc Immunol Rev.
2009;15:6-41
Ramos-Casals, M., et al., Autoimmune diseases induced by TNF-targeted therapies: analysis of 233
cases, Medicine (Baltimore). 2007;86(4):242-51
Ranjbaran, Z., et al., The relevance of sleep abnormalities to chronic inflammatory conditions,
Inflamm Res. 2007;56(2):51-7
Rao, R. K., et al., Oxidant-induced disruption of intestinal epithelial barrier function: role of
protein tyrosine phosphorylation, Am J Physiol. 1997;273:G812-G823
Rao, R. K., et al., Tyrosine phosphorylation and dissociation of occludin-ZO-1 and E-cadherin-
beta-catenin complexes from the cytoskeleton by oxidative stress, Biochem J. 2002;368:471-481
Rapaport, M. H., et al., A preliminary study of the effects of a single session of Swedish massage on
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and immune function in normal individuals, J Altern Complement
Med. 2010 [Epub ahead of print]
Reynolds A. C., et al., Impact of five nights of sleep restriction on glucose metabolism, leptin and
testosterone in young adult men, PLoS One. 2012;7(7)
Roberts, J. E., Visible light induced changes in the immune response through an eye-brain
mechanism (photoneuroimmunology), J Photochem Photobiol B. 1995;29(1):3-15
Robey, E., et al., Effect of evening postexercise cold water immersion on subsequent sleep, Med
Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45(7):1394-402
Russell, S. L., et al., Early life antibiotic-driven changes in microbiota enhance susceptibility to
allergic asthma, EMBO Rep. 2012;13(5):440-7
Russell, S. L., et al., Perinatal antibiotic treatment affects murine microbiota, immune responses
and allergic asthma, Gut Microbes. 2013;4(2):158-64
Sandyk, R. and Awerbuch, G. I., Nocturnal plasma melatonin and alpha-melanocyte stimulating
hormone levels during exacerbation of multiple sclerosis, Int J Neurosci. 1992;67(1-4):173-86
Saul, A. N., et al., Chronic stress and susceptibility to skin cancer, J Natl Cancer Inst.
2005;97(23):1760-1767
Seelig, M. S., Auto-immune complications of D-penicillamine—a possible result of zinc and
magnesium depletion and of pyridoxine inactivation, J Am Coll Nutr. 1982;1(2):207-14
Sequeira, I. R., et al., The effect of aspirin and smoking on urinary excretion profiles of lactulose
and mannitol in young women: toward a dynamic, aspirin augmented, test of gut mucosal
permeability, Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2012;24(9):e401-11
Shi, L., et al., Autoimmune regulator regulates autophagy in THP-1 human monocytes, Front Med
China. 2010;4(3):336-41
Silverman, M. N. and Sternberg, E. M.,Neuroendocrine immune interactions in rheumatoid
arthritis: mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance, Neuroimmunomodulation. 2008;15:19-28
Silverman, M. N. and Sternberg, E. M.,Glucocorticoid regulation of inflammation and its
functional correlates: from HPA axis to glucocorticoid receptor dysfunction, Ann NY Acad Sci.
2012;1261:55-63
Silverman, M. N., et al., Neuroendocrine and immune contributors to fatigue, Physical Med. Rehab.
2010;2:338-346
Singer, K. L., Relationship of serine/threonine phosphorylation/dephosphorylation signaling to
glucocorticoid regulation of tight junction permeability and ZO-1 distribution in nontransformed
mammary epithelial cells, J Biol Chem. 1994;269:16108-16115
Sokumbi, O., et al., Vasculitis associated with tumor necrosis factor- α inhibitors, Mayo Clin Proc.
2012;87(8):739-45
Stark, J. L., et al., Social stress induces glucocorticoid resistance in macrophages, Am J Physiol.
2001;280:1799-1805
Stasi, C. and Orlandelli, E., Role of the brain-gut axis in the pathophysiology of Crohn’s disease,
Dig. Dis. 2008;26:156-166
Sternberg, E. M., et al., Inflammatory mediator induced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activation is defective in streptococcal cell wall arthritis-susceptible
Lewis rats, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1989;86:2374-2378
Stote, K. S., et al., A controlled trial of reduced meal frequency without caloric restriction in
healthy, normal-weight, middle-aged adults, Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85:981-988
Straub, R. H., et al., How psychological stress via hormones and nerve fibers may exacerbate
rheumatoid arthritis, Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52:16-26
Suzuki, K., et al., Exhaustive exercise and type-1/type-2 cytokine balance with special focus on
interleukin-12 p40/p70, Exerc Immunol Rev. 2003;9:48-57
Swanson, G. R., et al., Sleep disturbances and inflammatory bowel disease: a potential trigger for
disease flare?, Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011;7(1):29-36
Szivak, T. K., et al., Adrenal cortical responses to high-intensity, short rest, resistance exercise in
men and women, J Strength Cond Res. 2013;27(3):748-60
Teegarden, S. L. and Bale, T. L., Effects of stress on dietary preference and intake are dependent
on access and stress sensitivity, Physiol Behav. 2008;93(4-5):713-23
Thomàs-Moyà, E., et al., Time-dependent modulation of rat serum paraoxonase 1 activity by
fasting, Pflugers Arch. 2007;453(6):831-7
Toyoda, K., et al., Cell proliferation induced by laxatives and related compounds in the rat
intestine, Cancer Lett. 1994;83(1-2):43-9
van Leeuwen, W. M., et al., Sleep restriction increases the risk of developing cardiovascular
diseases by augmenting proinflammatory responses through IL-17 and CRP, PLoS One. 2009;4(2)
van Nieuwenhoven, M. A., et al., Gastrointestinal profile of symptomatic athletes at rest and
during physical exercise, Eur J Appl Physiol. 2004;91(4):429-34
Vanstapel, F., et al., The role of glycogen synthase phosphatase in the glucocorticoid-induced
deposition of glycogen in foetal rat liver, Biochem. J. 1980;192:607-12
Van Wijck, K., et al., Aggravation of exercise-induced intestinal injury by Ibuprofen in athletes,
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(12):2257-62
Varady, K. A. and Hellerstein, M. K., Alternate-day fasting and chronic disease prevention: a
review of human and animal trials, Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;86(1):7-13
Wallace, J. L., et al., Gastric ulceration induced by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is a
neutrophil-dependent process, Am J Physiol. 1990;259(3 Pt 1):G462-7
Walsh, N. P., et al., Position statement. Part one: immune function and exercise, Exerc Immunol
Rev. 2011;17:6-63
Webb, H. E., et al., Psychological stress during exercise: cardiorespiratory and hormonal
responses, Eur J Appl Physiol. 2008;104(6):973-81
Webb, H. E., et al., Aerobic fitness affects cortisol responses to concurrent challenges, Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2013;45(2):379-86
Whittle, B. J., Temporal relationship between cyclooxygenase inhibition, as measured by
prostacyclin biosynthesis, and the gastrointestinal damage induced by indomethacin in the rat ,
Gastroenterology. 1981;80(1):94-8
Wright, H., et al., Gastrointestinal (GIT) symptoms in athletes: A review of risk factors associated
with the development of GIT symptoms during exercise, International Sport Med Journal. 2009;10
(3):116-123
Wu, G., et al., Understanding resilience, Front Behav Neurosci. 2013;7:10
Xing, J. H. and Soffer, E. E., Adverse effects of laxatives, Dis Colon Rectum. 2001;44(8):1201-9
Xu, D. Z., et al., Nitric oxide directly impairs intestinal barrier function, Shock. 2002;17(2):139-45
Yamagata, S., et al., Non-genomic inhibitory effect of glucocorticoids on activated peripheral
blood basophils through suppression of lipid raft formation, Clin Exp Immunol. 2012;170(1):86-93
Yang, N., et al., Current concepts in glucocorticoid resistance, Steroids. 2012;77(11):1041-9
Yeh, Y. J., et al., Gastrointestinal response and endotoxemia during intense exercise in hot and
cool environments, Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013;113(6):1575-83
Zhou, L. L., et al., Regulatory effect of melatonin on cytokine disturbances in the pristane-induced
lupus mice, Mediators Inflamm. 2010;pii:951210
Zisapel, N., et al., The relationship between melatonin and cortisol rhythms: clinical implications
of melatonin therapy, Drug Dev. Res. 2005;65:119-125

Chapter 4:
Moving Forward
Ferretti, G., et al., Celiac disease, inflammation and oxidative damage: a nutrigenetic approach,
Nutrients. 2012;4(4):243-257
Jirillo, E., et al., Healthy effects exerted by prebiotics, probiotics, and symbiotics with special
reference to their impact on the immune system, Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 2012;82(3):200-8
Dr. Datis Kharrazian (www.thyroidbook.com)
Riccio, P., The molecular basis of nutritional intervention in multiple sclerosis: a narrative
review, Complement Ther Med. 2011;19(4):228-37
Dr. Terry Wahls (www.terrywahls.com)

Chapter 5:
The Paleo Approach Diet
Afaghi, A., et al., Effect of low-glycemic load diet on changes in cardiovascular risk factors in
poorly controlled diabetic patients, Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(6):991-5
Alvarez-Suarez, J. M., Honey as a source of dietary antioxidants: structures, bioavailability and
evidence of protective effects against human chronic diseases, Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(5):621-38
Armstrong, P. B., et al., Immunohistochemical demonstration of a lipopolysaccharide in the cell
wall of a eukaryote, the green alga, Chlorella, Biol Bull. 2002;203(2):203-4
Augustin, J., et al., Alcohol retention in food preparation, J Am Diet Assoc. 1992;92(4):486-8
Baba, H., et al., Studies of anti-inflammatory effects of Rooibos tea in rats, Pediatr Int.
2009;51(5):700-4
Badman, M. K., et al., A very low carbohydrate ketogenic diet improves glucose tolerance in ob/ob
mice independently of weight loss, Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009;297(5):E1197-E1204
Barbara, G., et al., Mucosal permeability and immune activation as potential therapeutic targets of
probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome, J Clin Gastroenterol. 2012;46(Suppl):S52-5
Barrera, L. N., et al., TrxR1 and GPx2 are potently induced by isothiocyanates and selenium, and
mutually cooperate to protect Caco-2 cells against free radical-mediated cell death, Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2012;1823(10):1914-24
Barrett, J. S. and Gibson, P. R., Clinical ramifications of malabsorption of fructose and other short
chain carbohydrates, Practical Gastroenterology. 2007;53:51-65
Bauerova, K., et al., Effect of coenzyme Q(10) supplementation in the rat model of adjuvant
arthritis, Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2005;149(2):501-3
Bengmark, S., Gut microbiota, immune development and function, Pharmacol Res. 2013;69(1):87-
113
Betti, M., et al., Omega-3-enriched broiler meat: 3. Fatty acid distribution between triacylglycerol
and phospholipid classes, Poult Sci. 2009;88(8):1740-54
Bittner, A. C., et al., Prescript-assist probiotic-prebiotic treatment for irritable bowel syndrome:
an open-label, partially controlled, 1-year extension of a previously published controlled clinical
trial, Clin Ther. 2007;29(6):1153-60
Bonfig, W., et al., Selenium supplementation does not decrease thyroid peroxidase antibody
concentration in children and adolescents with autoimmune thyroiditis , ScientificWorldJournal.
2010;10:990-6
Born, P., Carbohydrate malabsorption in patients with non-specific abdominal complaints, World
J Gastroenterol. 2007, 13(43):5687-5691
Bosetti, C., et al., A pooled analysis of case-control studies of thyroid cancer. VII. Cruciferous and
other vegetables (International), Cancer Causes Control. 2002;13(8):765-75
Brenta, G., Why can insulin resistance be a natural consequence of thyroid dysfunction?, J Thyroid
Res. 2011;2011:152850
Chae, C. S., et al., Prophylactic effect of probiotics on the development of experimental
autoimmune myasthenia gravis, PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52119
Chandler, J. D. and Day, B. J., Thiocyanate: a potentially useful therapeutic agent with host
defense and antioxidant properties, Biochem Pharmacol. 2012;84(11):1381-7
Chearskul, S., et al., Effect of weight loss and ketosis on postprandial cholecystokinin and free
fatty acid concentrations, Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87(5):1238-46
Chen, Q., et al., Tributyltin chloride-induced immunotoxicity and thymocyte apoptosis are related
to abnormal Fas expression, Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2011;214(2):145-50
Corridoni D, et al., Probiotic bacteria regulate intestinal epithelial permeability in experimental
ileitis by a TNF-dependent mechanism, PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42067
Corsini, E., et al., Effects of pesticide exposure on the human immune system, Hum Exp Toxicol.
2008;27(9):671-80
Corsini, E., et al., Pesticide induced immunotoxicity in humans: A comprehensive review of the
existing evidence, Toxicology. 2013;307:123-35
Craig, S. A., Betaine in human nutrition, Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;80(3):539-49
Cross, G. A., and Fung, D. Y., The effect of microwaves on nutrient value of foods, Crit Rev Food
Sci Nutr. 1982;16(4):355-81
Davis, D. R., Declining fruit and vegetable nutrient composition: what is the evidence?, Hort
Science. 2009;44(1):15-19
Deters, A., et al., Aqueous extracts and polysaccharides from marshmallow roots (Althea
officinalis L.): cellular internalisation and stimulation of cell physiology of human epithelial cells
in vitro, J Ethnopharmacol. 2010;127(1):62-9
de Vogel, J., et al., Green vegetables, red meat and colon cancer: chlorophyll prevents the
cytotoxic and hyperproliferative effects of haem in rat colon, Carcinogenesis. 2005;26(2):387-93
Dhiman, T. R., et al., Conjugated linoleic acid content of milk from cows fed different diets, J Dairy
Sci. 1999;82(10):2146-56
Diez-Gonzalez, F., et al., Grain-feeding and the dissemination of acid-resistant Escherichia coli
from cattle, Science. 1998;281:1666-8
Dressler, A., et al., Type 1 diabetes and epilepsy: efficacy and safety of the ketogenic diet,
Epilepsia. 2010;51(6):1086-9
Duckett, S. K., et al., Effects of time on feed on beef nutrient composition, J Anim Sci.
1993;71(8):2079-88
Ertek, S., et al., Relationship between serum zinc levels, thyroid hormones and thyroid volume
following successful iodine supplementation, Hormones. 2010;9(3):263-268
Faber, T. A., et al., Protein digestibility evaluations of meat and fish substrates using laboratory,
avian and ileally cannulated dog assays, J Anim Sci. 2010;88:1421-1432
Fooks, L. J. and Gibson, G. R.,Probiotics as modulators of the gut flora, Br J Nutr 2002;88(Suppl
1):S39-S49
Fraser, D. A., et al., Reduction in serum leptin and IGF-1 but preserved T-lymphocyte numbers and
activation after a ketogenic diet in rheumatoid arthritis patients, Clin Exp Rheumatol.
2000;18(2):209-14
Fraser, D. A., et al., Serum levels of interleukin-6 and dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate in
response to either fasting or a ketogenic diet in rheumatoid arthritis patients, Clin Exp Rheumatol.
2000;18(3):357-62
Gerritsen, J. et al., Intestinal microbiota in human health and disease: the impact of probiotics,
Genes Nutr. 2011;6(3):209-240
Gibson, G. R., Fibre and effects on probiotics (the prebiotic concept), Clinical Nutr. Suppl.
2004;1(2):25-31
Gibson, P. R. and Shepherd, S. J., Evidence-based dietary management of functional
gastrointestinal symptoms: The FODMAP approach, J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(2):252-8
Gibson, P. R. and Shepherd, S. J., Food choice as a key management strategy for functional
gastrointestinal symptoms, Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107(5):657-66
Gwee, K. A., Fiber, FODMAPs, flora, flatulence, and the functional bowel disorders, J
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(8):1335-6
Hakonson, T. E. and Whicker, F. W., The contribution of various tissues and organs to total body
mass in the mule deer, J Mammal. 1971;52(3):628-30
Hansen, L. L., et al., Effect of organic pig production systems on performance and meat quality,
Meat Sci. 2006;74(4):605-15
Hassuneh, M. R., et al., Immunotoxicity induced by acute subtoxic doses of paraquat herbicide:
implication of shifting cytokine gene expression toward T-helper (T(H))-17 phenotype, Chem Res
Toxicol. 2012;25(10):2112-6
Heaney, R. P. and Weaver, C. M., Calcium absorption from kale, Am J Clin Nutr. 1990;51(4):656-7
Hirahashi, T., et al., Activation of the human innate immune system by Spirulina: augmentation of
interferon production and NK cytotoxicity by oral administration of hot water extract of Spirulina
platensis, Int Immunopharmacol. 2002;2(4):423-34
Ho, K. J., et al., Alaskan Arctic Eskimo: responses to a customary high fat diet, Am J Clin Nutr.
1972;25(8):737-45
Hodkinson, C. F., et al., Preliminary evidence of immune function modulation by thyroid hormones
in healthy men and women aged 55-70 years, J Endocrinol. 2009;202(1):55-63
Hoffman, C. J., and Zabik, M. E.,Effects of microwave cooking/reheating on nutrients and food
systems: a review of recent studies, J Am Diet Assoc. 1985;85(8):922-6
Hopkins, A. L., et al., Hibiscus sabdariffa L. in the treatment of hypertension and hyperlipidemia:
a comprehensive review of animal and human studies, Fitoterapia. 2013;85:84-94
Hsu, H. Y., Immunostimulatory bioactivity of algal polysaccharides from Chlorella pyrenoidosa
activates macrophages via Toll-like receptor 4, J Agric Food Chem. 2010;58(2):927-36
Ip, C., et al., Conjugated linoleic acid. A powerful anti-carcinogen from animal fat sources ,
Cancer. 1994;74(3 suppl):1050-4
Irion, C. W., Growing alliums and brassicas in selenium-enriched soils increases their
anticarcinogenic potentials, Med Hypotheses. 1999;53(3):232-5
Ishii, K., et al., Medium-chain triglycerides enhance mucous secretion and cell proliferation in the
rat, J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(3):204-11
Jakubíková, J., et al., Effect of isothiocyanates on nuclear accumulation of NF-kappaB, Nrf2, and
thioredoxin in caco-2 cells, J Agric Food Chem. 2006;54(5):1656-62
Jennings, A. S., Regulation of hepatic triiodothyronine production in the streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rat, Am J Physiol. 1984;247(4 Pt 1):E526-33
Jonker, D., and Til, H. P., Human diets cooked by microwave or conventionally: comparative sub-
chronic (13-wk) toxicity study in rats. Food Chem Toxicol. 1995;33(4):245-56
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group,Variation of
interstitial glucose measurements assessed by continuous glucose monitors in healthy, nondiabetic
individuals, Diabetes Care. 2010;33(6):1297-9
Kim do, Y., et al., Inflammation-mediated memory dysfunction and effects of a ketogenic diet in a
murine model of multiple sclerosis, PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e35476
Kiseleva, E. P., et al., The role of components of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus in
pathogenesis and serologic diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid disease, Benef Microbes.
2011;2(2):139-54
Khaw, K. T., et al., Association of hemoglobin A1c with cardiovascular disease and mortality in
adults: the European prospective investigation into cancer in Norfolk, Ann Intern Med.
2004;141(6):413-20
Klein B. P., Retention of nutrients in microwave-cooked foods, Bol Assoc Med P R.
1989;81(7):277-9
Kobayashi, T., et al., Probiotic upregulation of peripheral IL-17 responses does not exacerbate
neurological symptoms in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse, Immunopharmacol
Immunotoxicol. 2012;34(3):423-33
Kono, H., et al., Medium-chain triglycerides enhance secretory IgA expression in rat intestine
after administration of endotoxin, Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004;286(6):G1081-9
Kraft, J., et al., Extensive analysis of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, cla, trans-18:1
isomers, and plasmalogenic lipids in different retail beef types, J Agric Food Chem. 2008;56:4775-
4782
Krishnan, S., et al., Glycemic index, glycemic load, and cereal fiber intake and risk of type 2
diabetes in US black women, Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(21):2304-9
Kunishiro, K., et al., Effects of rooibos tea extract on antigen-specific antibody production and
cytokine generation in vitro and in vivo, Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2001;65(10):2137-45
Kwak, J. H., et al., Beneficial immunostimulatory effect of short-term Chlorella supplementation:
enhancement of natural killer cell activity and early inflammatory response (randomized, double-
blinded, placebo-controlled trial), Nutr J. 2012;11:53
Le Bert, N., et al., DC priming by M. vaccae inhibits Th2 responses in contrast to specific TLR2
priming and is associated with selective activation of the CREB pathway, PLoS One.
2011;6(4):e18346
Lebret, B., Effects of feeding and rearing systems on growth, carcass composition and meat quality
in pigs, Animal. 2008;2(10):1548-58
Ledochowski, M., et al., Fructose malabsorption is associated with decreased plasma tryptophan,
Scand J Gastroenterol. 2001;36(4):367-71
Leheska, J. M., et al., Effects of conventional and grass-feeding systems on the nutrient
composition of beef, J Anim Sci. 2008;86(12):3575-85
Lindeberg, S., et al., Determinants of serum triglycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
in traditional Trobriand Islanders: the Kitava Study, Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2003;63(3):175-80
López-Berenguer, C., et al., Effects of microwave cooking conditions on bioactive compounds
present in broccoli inflorescences, J Agric Food Chem. 2007;55(24):10001-7
Luciano, G., et al., Vitamin E and polyunsaturated fatty acids in bovine muscle and the oxidative
stability of beef from cattle receiving grass or concentrate-based rations , J Anim Sci.
2011;89(11):3759-68
Ludwig, D. S., The glycemic index: physiological mechanisms relating to obesity, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease, JAMA. 2002;287(18):2414-23
Magnusson, R. P., et al., Mechanism of iodide-dependent catalatic activity of thyroid peroxidase
and lactoperoxidase, J Biol Chem. 1984;259(1):197-205
Marcason, W., What is the FODMAP diet?, J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(10):1696
Marchello, M. J. and Driskell, J. A.,Nutrient composition of grass- and grain-finished bison, Great
Plains Research. 2001;11:65-82
Mardi, D. L., et al., Where’s the (not) meat? Byproducts from beef and pork production , United
States Department of Agriculture. 2011;LDP-M-209-01
McAfee, A. J., et al., Red meat from animals offered a grass diet increases plasma and platelet n-3
PUFA in healthy consumers, Br J Nutr. 2011;105(1):80-9
McDanell, R., et al., Chemical and biological properties of indole glucosinolates
(glucobrassicins): a review, Food Chem Toxicol. 1988;26(1):59-70
McKay, D. L. and Blumberg, J. B.,A review of the bioactivity of South African herbal teas: rooibos
(Aspalathus linearis) and honeybush (Cyclopia intermedia), Phytother Res. 2007;21(1):1-16
McMillan-Price, J., et al., Comparison of 4 diets of varying glycemic load on weight loss and
cardiovascular risk reduction in overweight and obese young adults: a randomized controlled
trial, Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(14):1466-75
Meadows, S. D. and Hakonson, T. E., Contribution of tissues to body mass in elk, J Wildl Manage.
1982;46(3):838-41
Michail, S. and Kenche, H., Gut microbiota is not modified by randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of VSL#3 in diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome, Probiotics
Antimicrob Proteins. 2011;3(1):1-7
Molyneux, S. L., et al., Coenzyme Q10: an independent predictor of mortality in chronic heart
failure, J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52(18):1435-41
Morris, S. T., et al., Short-term grain feeding and its effect on carcass and meat quality,
Proceedings of the New Zealand Society of Animal Production. 1997;57:275-277
Moshfegh, A. J., et al., Presence of inulin and oligofructose in the diets of Americans, J Nutr.
1999;129(7 Suppl):1407S-11S
Mostafalou, S. and Abdollahi, M., Pesticides and human chronic diseases: evidences, mechanisms,
and perspectives, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;268(2):157-77
Mozaffarian, D. and Rimm, E. B.,Fish intake, contaminants, and human health: evaluating the
risks and the benefits, JAMA. 2006;296(15):1885-99
Muir, J. G., et al., Fructan and free fructose content of common Australian vegetables and fruit, J
Agric Food Chem. 2007;55(16):6619-27
Nelson, B. H., IL-2, regulatory T cells, and tolerance, J Immunol. 2004;172(7):3983-8
Ng, S. C., et al., Mechanisms of action of probiotics: recent advances, Inflamm Bowel Dis.
2009;15(2):300-310
Nichols, G. A., et al., Normal fasting plasma glucose and risk of type 2 diabetes diagnosis, Am J
Med. 2008;121(6):519-24
Niness, K. R., Inulin and oligofructose: what are they?, J Nutr. 1999;129(7 Suppl):1402S-6S
Ockerman, H. W., and Hansen, C. L., Animal Byproduct Processing and Utilization, First edition.
Lancaster:Technomic, 2000
O’Dea K., Traditional diet and food preferences of Australian aboriginal hunter-gatherers , Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1991;334(1270):233-40
Ong, D. K., et al., Manipulation of dietary short chain carbohydrates alters the pattern of gas
production and genesis of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome , J Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2010;25(8):1366-73
Papista, C., et al., Gluten induces coeliac-like disease in sensitised mice involving IgA, CD71 and
transglutaminase 2 interactions that are prevented by probiotics, Lab Invest. 2012;92(4):625-35
Parks, C. G., et al., Insecticide use and risk of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus in The Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study, Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2011;63(2):184-194
Pereira, P. M. and Vicente, A. F., Meat nutritional composition and nutritive role in the human
diet, Meat Sci. 2013;93(3):586-92
Ponnampalam, E. N., et al., Effect of feeding systems on omega-3 fatty acids, conjugated linoleic
acid and trans fatty acids in Australian beef cuts: potential impact on human health, Asia Pac J
Clin Nutr. 2006;15(1):21-9
Ponte, P. I., et al., Restricting the intake of a cereal-based feed in free-range-pastured poultry:
effects on performance and meat quality, Poult Sci. 2008;87(10):2032-42
Pugh, N., et al., Isolation of three high molecular weight polysaccharide preparations with potent
immunostimulatory activity from Spirulina platensis, aphanizomenon flos-aquae and Chlorella
pyrenoidosa, Planta Med. 2001;67(8):737-42
Quinlan, P., et al., Effects of hot tea, coffee and water ingestion on physiological responses and
mood: the role of caffeine, water and beverage type, Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1997;134(2):164-
73
Reimer, R. A., et al., Satiety hormone and metabolomic response to an intermittent high energy
diet differs in rats consuming long-term diets high in protein or prebiotic fiber, J Proteome Res.
2012;11(8):4065-74
Roberfroid, M. B., Introducing inulin-type fructans, Br J Nutr. 2005;93(Suppl 1):S13-25
Röhrle, F. T., et al., Carotenoid, colour and reflectance measurements in bovine adipose tissue to
discriminate between beef from different feeding systems, Meat Sci. 2011;88(3):347-53
Rowland, I., “Modification of gut flora metabolism by probiotics and oligosaccharides.” In
Probiotics: Prospects of Use in Opportunistic Infection, edited by Roy Fuller, et al., 35-46.
Herborn-Dill: Institute for Microbiology And Biochemistry, 1995
Ruemmele F. M., et al., Clinical evidence for immunomodulatory effects of probiotic bacteria, J
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2009;48(2):126-41
Rule, D. C., et al., Comparison of muscle fatty acid profiles and cholesterol concentrations of
bison, beef cattle, elk, and chicken, J Anim Sci. 2002;80(5):1202-11
Salazar, K. D., et al., A review of the immunotoxicity of the pesticide 3,4-dichloropropionanalide, J
Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2008;11(8):630-45
Schiffer, C., et al., A strain of Lactobacillus casei inhibits the effector phase of immune
inflammation, J Immunol. 2011;187(5):2646-55
Selvin, E., et al., Glycemic control and coronary heart disease risk in persons with and without
diabetes: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study, Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(16):1910-6
Shapiro, T. A., et al., Safety, tolerance, and metabolism of broccoli sprout glucosinolates and
isothiocyanates: a clinical phase I study, Nutr Cancer. 2006;55(1):53-62
Sheeshka, J. and Murkin, E., Nutritional aspects of fish compared with other protein sources ,
Comments on Toxicology. 2002;8(4-6):375-397
Shepherd, S. J. and Gibson, P. R., Fructose malabsorption and symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome: guidelines for effective dietary management, J Am Diet Assoc. 2006;106(10):1631-9
Shida, K. and Nanno, M., Probiotics and immunology: separating the wheat from the chaff, Trends
Immunol. 2008;29(11):565-73
Shida K, et al., Flexible cytokine production by macrophages and T cells in response to probiotic
bacteria: a possible mechanism by which probiotics exert multifunctional immune regulatory
activities, Gut Microbes. 2011;2(2):109-14
Smith, G. C., et al., Dietary supplementation of vitamin E to cattle to improve shelf life and case
life of beef for domestic and international markets, Anim Feed Sci Tech. 1996;59(1):207-214
Soil-based organisms improve immune function: shift cytokine profile from TH2 to TH1, Posit
Health News. 1998 Spring;(No 16):16-8
Staudacher, H. M., et al., Comparison of symptom response following advice for a diet low in
fermentable carbohydrates (FODMAPs) versus standard dietary advice in patients with irritable
bowel syndrome, J Hum Nutr Diet. 2011;24(5):487-95
Sugimura, T., et al., Heterocyclic amines: mutagens/carcinogens produced during cooking of meat
and fish, Cancer Sci. 2004;95(4):290-9
Sun, T., et al., Aspects of lipid oxidation of meat from free-range broilers consuming a diet
containing grasshoppers on alpine steppe of the Tibetan Plateau, Poult Sci. 2012;91(1):224-31
Sun, T., et al., Meat fatty acid and cholesterol level of free-range broilers fed on grasshoppers on
alpine rangeland in the Tibetan Plateau, J Sci Food Agric. 2012;92(11):2239-43
Taty Anna, K., et al., Anti-inflammatory effect of Curcuma longa (turmeric) on collagen-induced
arthritis: an anatomico-radiological study, Clin Ter. 2011;162(3):201-7
Terry, C. A., et al., Yields of by-products from different cattle types , J Anim Sci. 1990;68:4200-
4205
Tirosh, A., et al., Normal fasting plasma glucose levels and type 2 diabetes in young men, N Engl J
Med. 2005;353(14):1454-62
Tlaskalová-Hogenová, H., et al., Commensal bacteria (normal microflora), mucosal immunity and
chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, Immunol Lett. 2004;93(2-3):97-108
Tripathi, S., et al., Ginger extract inhibits LPS induced macrophage activation and function, BMC
Complement Altern Med. 2008;8:1
Tsilingiri K and Rescigno M., Postbiotics: what else?, Benef Microbes. 2013;4(1):101-7
van Bakel, M. M., et al., Antioxidant and thyroid hormone status in selenium-deficient
phenylketonuric and hyperphenylalaninemic patients, Am J Clin Nutr. 2000;72(4):976-81
Villegas, R., et al., Prospective study of dietary carbohydrates, glycemic index, glycemic load, and
incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in middle-aged Chinese women, Arch Intern Med.
2007;167(21):2310-6
Virion, A., et al., Opposite effects of thiocyanate on tyrosine iodination and thyroid hormone
synthesis, Eur J Biochem. 1980;112(1):1-7
Weigle, D. S., et al., A high-protein diet induces sustained reductions in appetite, ad libitum
caloric intake, and body weight despite compensatory changes in diurnal plasma leptin and
ghrelin concentrations, Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;82(1):41-8
Wheeler, M. D., et al., Glycine: a new anti-inflammatory immunonutrient, Cell Mol Life Sci.
1999;56(9-10):843-56
Williams, J. E., et al., Effect of production systems on performance, body composition and lipid
and mineral profiles of soft tissue in cattle, J. Anim. Sci. 1983;57:1020
Yuan, G.-F., et al., Effects of different cooking methods on health-promoting compounds of
broccoli, J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2009;10(8):580-588
Zhao, G. J., et al., Curcumin inhibits suppressive capacity of naturally occurring CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells in mice in vitro, Int Immunopharmacol. 2012;14(1):99-106
Zimmermann, M. B. and Köhrle, J.,The impact of iron and selenium deficiencies on iodine and
thyroid metabolism: biochemistry and relevance to public health, Thyroid. 2002;12(10):867-78

Chapter 6:
The Paleo Approach Lifestyle
Bassett, D. R. Jr., et al., Medical hazards of prolonged sitting, Exerc Sport Sci Rev.
2010;38(3):101-2
Bennett, M. P., et al., The effect of mirthful laughter on stress and natural killer cell activity,
Altern Ther Health Med. 2003;9(2):38-45
Berg, A. H. and Scherer P. E., Adipose tissue, inflammation, and cardiovascular disease. Circ Res.
2005;96(9):939-49
Berk, L. S., et al., Neuroendocrine and stress hormone changes during mirthful laughter, Am J
Med Sci. 1989;298(6):390-6
Brunstrom, J. M. and Mitchell, G. L.,Effects of distraction on the development of satiety, Br J Nutr.
2006;96(4):761-9
Bryan, S., et al., The effects of yoga on psychosocial variables and exercise adherence: a
randomized, controlled pilot study, Altern Ther Health Med. 2012;18(5):50-9
Burkhart, K. and Phelps, J. R.,Amber lenses to block blue light and improve sleep: a randomized
trial, Chronobiol Int. 2009;26(8):1602-12
Carlson, L. E., et al., Mindfulness-based stress reduction in relation to quality of life, mood,
symptoms of stress and levels of cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and melatonin
in breast and prostate cancer outpatients, Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2004;29(4):448-74
Cattaneo, A., et al., Tomesa balneophototherapy in mild to severe psoriasis: a retrospective
clinical trial in 174 patients, Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2012;28(3):169-71
Christie, W. and Moore, C., The impact of humor on patients with cancer, Clin J Oncol Nurs.
2005;9(2):211-8
Dautovich, N. D., et al., Subjective and objective napping and sleep in older adults: are evening
naps “bad” for nighttime sleep?, J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56(9):1681-6
Dolgoff-Kaspar, R., et al., Effect of laughter yoga on mood and heart rate variability in patients
awaiting organ transplantation: a pilot study, Altern Ther Health Med. 2012;18(5):61-6
Dubey, P. and Nundy, S., Mastication and acid secretion, Postgrad Med J. 1984;60(702):272-4
Dunstan, D. W., et al., Too much sitting -a health hazard , Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;97(3):368-
76
Emmons, R. A. and McCullough, M. E.,Counting blessings versus burdens: an experimental
investigation of gratitude and subjective well-being in daily life, J Pers Soc Psychol.
2003;84(2):377-89
Epstein, L. H., et al., Habituation as a determinant of human food intake, Psychol Rev.
2009;116(2):384-407
Feldman, G., et al., Differential effects of mindful breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and
loving-kindness meditation on decentering and negative reactions to repetitive thoughts, Behav
Res Ther. 2010;48(10):1002-11
Hayashi, M., et al., Recuperative power of a short daytime nap with or without stage 2 sleep, Sleep.
2005;28(7):829-36
Kraft, T. L. and Pressman, S. D., Grin and bear it: the influence of manipulated facial expression
on the stress response, Psychol Sci. 2012;23(11):1372-8
Li, A. W. and Goldsmith, C. A., The effects of yoga on anxiety and stress, Altern Med Rev.
2012;17(1):21-35
Li, J., et al., Improvement in chewing activity reduces energy intake in one meal and modulates
plasma gut hormone concentrations in obese and lean young Chinese men, Am J Clin Nutr.
2011;94(3):709-16
Mahagita, C., Roles of meditation on alleviation of oxidative stress and improvement of
antioxidant system, J Med Assoc Thai. 2010;93(Suppl 6):S242-54
Martarelli, D., et al., Diaphragmatic breathing reduces exercise-induced oxidative stress , Evid
Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011;2011:932430
Martarelli, D., et al., Diaphragmatic breathing reduces postprandial oxidative stress , J Altern
Complement Med. 2011;17(7):623-8
Merkes, M., Mindfulness-based stress reduction for people with chronic diseases , Aust J Prim
Health. 2010;16(3):200-10
Nater, U. M., et al., Stress-induced changes in human salivary alpha-amylase activity --
associations with adrenergic activity, Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2006;31(1):49-58
Okada, H., et al., The ‘hygiene hypothesis’ for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update , Clin
Exp Immunol. 2010;160(1):1-9
Oldham-Cooper, R. E., et al., Playing a computer game during lunch affects fullness, memory for
lunch, and later snack intake, Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93(2):308-13
Pera, P., et al., Influence of mastication on gastric emptying, J Dent Res. 2002;81(3):179-81
Praissman, S., Mindfulness-based stress reduction: a literature review and clinician’s guide , J Am
Acad Nurse Pract. 2008;20(4):212-6
Riccelli, P. T., et al., Depressive and elative mood inductions as a function of exaggerated versus
contradictory facial expressions, Percept Mot Skills. 1989;68(2):443-52
Roberts, J. E., Light and immunomodulation, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2000;917:435-45
Sánchez-Barceló, E. J., et al., Clinical uses of melatonin: evaluation of human trials, Curr Med
Chem. 2010;17(19):2070-95
Schmidt, S., et al., Treating fibromyalgia with mindfulness-based stress reduction: results from a
3-armed randomized controlled trial, Pain. 2011;152(2):361-9.
Signal, T. L., et al., Duration of sleep inertia after napping during simulated night work and in
extended operations, Chronobiol Int. 2012;29(6):769-79
Smith, J. A., et al., Is there more to yoga than exercise?, Altern Ther Health Med. 2011;17(3):22-9
Soussignan, R., Duchenne smile, emotional experience, and autonomic reactivity: a test of the
facial feedback hypothesis, Emotion. 2002;2(1):52-74
Straif, K., et al., Carcinogenicity of shift-work, painting, and fire-fighting, Lancet Oncol.
2007;8(12):1065-6
Torta, R., et al., Laughter and smiling. The gesture between social philosophy and psychobiology,
Minerva Psichiatr. 1990;31(1):21-6
Vgontzas, A. N., et al., Daytime napping after a night of sleep loss decreases sleepiness, improves
performance, and causes beneficial changes in cortisol and interleukin-6 secretion, Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab. 2007;292(1):E253-61
Wood, A. M., et al., Gratitude and well-being: a review and theoretical integration, Clin Psychol
Rev. 2010;30(7):890-905
Zhu, Y., et al., Increasing the number of masticatory cycles is associated with reduced appetite and
altered postprandial plasma concentrations of gut hormones, insulin and glucose, Br J Nutr.
2013;110(2):384-90

Chapter 7:
Implementing the Paleo Approach
Castell, D. O., Diet and the lower esophageal sphincter, Am. J Clinical Nutr. 1975;28:1296-98
Choi, K. H., et al., Efficacy of levofloxacin and rifaximin based quadruple therapy in Helicobacter
pylori associated gastroduodenal disease: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial , J Korean
Med Sci. 2011;26(6):785-90
Cuoco, L. and Salvagnini, M., Small intestine bacterial overgrowth in irritable bowel syndrome: a
retrospective study with rifaximin, Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2006;52(1):89-95
Duggan, C., et al., Nutrition in Pediatrics: Basic Science, Clinical Applications, Hamilton: BC
Decker Inc., 2008
Fritzsche, M., Chronic Lyme borreliosis at the root of multiple sclerosis: is a cure with antibiotics
attainable?, Med Hypotheses. 2005;64(3):438-48
Guerrier, G. and D’Ortenzio, E., The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction in leptospirosis: a systematic
review, PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59266
Hodges, K. and Winstanley, S., Effects of optimism, social support, fighting spirit, cancer worry
and internal health locus of control on positive affect in cancer survivors: a path analysis, Stress
Health. 2012;28(5):408-15
Lally, P., et al., How are habits formed: Modelling habit formation in the real world, Eur J Soc
Psychol. 2010;40:998-1009
Lauritano, E. C., et al., Rifaximin dose-finding study for the treatment of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth, Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2005;22(1):31-5
Lauritano, E. C., et al., Antibiotic therapy in small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: rifaximin
versus metronidazole, Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2009;13(2):111-6
Marshall, T. G. and Marshall, F. E., Sarcoidosis succumbs to antibiotics -implications for
autoimmune disease, Autoimmun Rev. 2004;3(4):295-300
Moore, J. A., Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction in Lyme disease, Cutis. 1987;39(5):397-8
Pimentel, M., et al., Rifaximin therapy for patients with irritable bowel syndrome without
constipation, N Engl J Med. 2011;364(1):22-32
Schofield, P., et al., Hope, optimism, and survival in a randomized trial of first-line chemotherapy
for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:15s (suppl;abstr 9039)

Chapter 8:
Troubleshooting
Abenavoli, L., et al., Milk thistle in liver diseases: past, present, future, Phytother Res.
2010;24(10):1423-32
Aditi, A. and Graham, D. Y., Vitamin C, gastritis, and gastric disease: a historical review and
update, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(10):2504-15
Alhaj, H. A., et al., Effects of DHEA administration on episodic memory, cortisol and mood in
healthy young men: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2006;188(4):541-51
Amirghofran, Z., Herbal medicines for immunosuppression, Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2012;11(2):111-9
Arck, P., et al., Is there a ‘gut-brain-skin axis’?, Exp Dermatol. 2010;19(5):401-5
Barikbin, B., et al., Antioxidant status in patients with lichen planus, Clin Exp Dermatol.
2011;36(8):851-4
Bauer, M. E., et al., Psychoneuroendocrine interventions aimed at attenuating immunosenescence:
a review, Biogerontology. 2013;14(1):9-20
Bauer-Petrovska, B. and Petrushevska-Tozi, L., Mineral and water soluble vitamin content in the
Kombucha drink, Int J Food Sci Tech. 2000;35(2):201-205
Berman, A. L., Efficacy of rifaximin and vancomycin combination therapy in a patient with
refractory Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea, J Clin Gastroenterol. 2007;41(10):932-3
Bihari, B., Bernard Bihari, MD: low-dose naltrexone for normalizing immune system function,
Altern Ther Health Med. 2013;19(2):56-65
Bircher, A. J., et al., IgE to food allergens are highly prevalent in patients allergic to pollens, with
and without symptoms of food allergy, Clin Exp Allergy. 1994;24(4):367-74
Bittner, A. C., et al., Prescript-Assist probiotic-prebiotic treatment for irritable bowel syndrome: a
methodologically oriented, 2-week, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical study,
Clin Ther. 2005;27(6):755-61
Bittner, A. C., et al., Prescript-assist probiotic-prebiotic treatment for irritable bowel syndrome:
an open-label, partially controlled, 1-year extension of a previously published controlled clinical
trial, Clin Ther. 2007;29(6):1153-60
Blaney, G. P., et al., Vitamin D metabolites as clinical markers in autoimmune and chronic
disease, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2009;1173:384-90
Block, K. I. and Mead, M. N.,Immune system effects of echinacea, ginseng, and astragalus: a
review, Integr Cancer Ther. 2003;2(3):247-67
Bodmer, S., et al., Biogenic amines in foods: histamine and food processing, Inflamm Res.
1999;48(6):296-300
Borody, T. J., et al., Bowel-flora alteration: a potential cure for inflammatory bowel disease and
irritable bowel syndrome?. Med J Aust. 1989;150(10):604
Borsuk, O. S., et al., New promising natural immunocorrective agents, Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk.
2009;(11):9-12
Bowe, W. P. and Logan, A. C., Acne vulgaris, probiotics and the gut-brain-skin axis -back to the
future?, Gut Pathog. 2011;3(1):1
Brody, S., et al., A randomized controlled trial of high dose ascorbic acid for reduction of blood
pressure, cortisol, and subjective responses to psychological stress , Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2002;159(3):319-24
Brown, K. M., et al., Effects of organic and inorganic selenium supplementation on selenoenzyme
activity in blood lymphocytes, granulocytes, platelets and erythrocytes, Clin Sci (Lond).
2000;98(5):593-9
Brush, J., et al., The effect of Echinacea purpurea, Astragalus membranaceus and Glycyrrhiza
glabra on CD69 expression and immune cell activation in humans, Phytother Res. 2006;20(8):687-
95
Buckley, J. D., et al., Bovine colostrum supplementation during running training increases
intestinal permeability, Nutrients. 2009;1(2):224-34
Bulat, Z., et al., Effect of magnesium supplementation on the distribution patterns of zinc, copper,
and magnesium in rabbits exposed to prolonged cadmium intoxication, ScientificWorldJournal.
2012;2012:572514
Bures, J., et al., Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome , World J Gastroenterol.
2010;16(24):2978-2990
Burns, J., et al., Plant foods and herbal sources of resveratrol, J Agric Food Chem.
2002;50(11):3337-40
Butt, M. S. and Sultan, M. T., Ginger and its health claims: molecular aspects, Crit Rev Food Sci
Nutr. 2011;51(5):383-93
Calder, P. C. and Yaqoob, P., Glutamine and the immune system, Amino Acids. 1999;17(3):227-41
Calderon, T. E., et al., Meat-specific IgG and IgA antibodies coexist with IgE antibodies in sera
from allergic patients: clinical association and modulation by exclusion diet, J Biol Regul
Homeost Agents. 2010;24(3):261-71
Carrillo, A. E., et al., Vitamin C supplementation and salivary immune function following exercise-
heat stress, Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2008;3(4):516-30
Chakraborty, B. and Sengupta, M., Boosting of nonspecific host response by aromatic spices
turmeric and ginger in immunocompromised mice, Cell Immunol. 2012;280(1):92-100
Chandra, S., et al., Endoscopic jejunal biopsy culture: a simple and effective method to study
jejunal microflora, Indian J Gastroenterol. 2010;29(6):226-30
Chapman, T. M., et al., VSL#3 probiotic mixture: a review of its use in chronic inflammatory bowel
diseases, Drugs. 2006;66(10):1371-87
Chen, C. and Liu, B. Y., Changes in major components of tea fungus metabolites during prolonged
fermentation, J Appl Microbiol. 2000;89(5):834-9
Choi, K. H., et al., Efficacy of levofloxacin and rifaximin based quadruple therapy in Helicobacter
pylori associated gastroduodenal disease: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial, J Korean
Med Sci. 2011;26(6):785-90
Chung, B. Y., et al., Treatment of atopic dermatitis with a low-histamine diet, Ann Dermatol.
2011;23(Suppl 1):S91-5
Clements Jr., R. S. and Darnell, B.,Myo-inositol content of common foods: development of a high
myo-inositol diet, Am J. Clin. Nutr. 1980;33:1954-1967
Collins, S. M., et al., The interplay between the intestinal microbiota and the brain, Nat Rev
Microbiol. 2012;10(11):735-42
Crosbie, D., et al., Dehydroepiandrosterone for systemic lupus erythematosus , Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD005114
Cryan, J. F. and O’Mahony, S. M., The microbiome-gut-brain axis: from bowel to behavior,
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011;23(3):187-92
Cryan, J. F. and Dinan, T. G., Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on
brain and behaviour, Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012;13(10):701-12
Cuoco, L. and Salvagnini, M., Small intestine bacterial overgrowth in irritable bowel syndrome: a
retrospective study with rifaximin, Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2006;52(1):89-95
Dai, C., et al., VSL#3 probiotics regulate the intestinal epithelial barrier in vivo and in vitro via
the p38 and ERK signaling pathways, Int J Mol Med. 2012;29(2):202-8
Dai, J. H., et al., Glycyrrhizin enhances interleukin-12 production in peritoneal macrophages,
Immunology. 2001;103(2):235-43
Deters, A., et al., Aqueous extracts and polysaccharides from marshmallow roots (Althea
officinalis L.): cellular internalisation and stimulation of cell physiology of human epithelial cells
in vitro, J Ethnopharmacol. 2010;127(1):62-9
Dhabhar, F. S., Psychological stress and immunoprotection versus immunopathology in the skin,
Clin Dermatol. 2013;31(1):18-30
D’Souza, R. and Powell-Tuck, J.,Glutamine supplements in the critically ill, J R Soc Med.
2004;97(9):425-427
Duntas, L. H., et al., Effects of a six month treatment with selenomethionine in patients with
autoimmune thyroiditis, Eur J Endocrinol. 2003;148(4):389-93
Duthie, G. G. and Wood, A. D., Natural salicylates: foods, functions and disease prevention, Food
Funct. 2011;2(9):515-20
Eby, G. A. and Eby, K. L., Rapid recovery from major depression using magnesium treatment , Med
Hypotheses. 2006;67(2):362-70
Eby, G. A. and Eby, K. L., Magnesium for treatment-resistant depression: a review and hypothesis ,
Med Hypotheses. 2010;74(4):649-60
Falchetti, R., et al., Effects of resveratrol on human immune cell function, Life Sci. 2001;70(1):81-
96
Fernando, S. L. and Clarke, L. R.,Salicylate intolerance: a masquerader of multiple adverse drug
reactions, BMJ Case Rep. 2009:pii:bcr02.2009
Ferreira, I. M. and Pinho, O.,Biogenic amines in Portuguese traditional foods and wines, J Food
Prot. 2006;69(9):2293-303
Forsythe, P. and Kunze, W. A., Voices from within: gut microbes and the CNS, Cell Mol Life Sci.
2013;70(1):55-69
Fraternale, A., et al., Inhibition of murine AIDS by pro-glutathione (GSH) molecules,Antiviral Res.
2008;77(2):120-7
Geroldinger-Simic, M., et al., Birch pollen-related food allergy: clinical aspects and the role of
allergen-specific IgE and IgG4 antibodies, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;127(3):616-22.e1
Ghanim, H., et al., A resveratrol and polyphenol preparation suppresses oxidative and
inflammatory stress response to a high-fat, high-carbohydrate meal , J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2011;96(5):1409-14
Giordano, R., et al., Neuroregulation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in humans:
effects of GABA-, mineralocorticoid-, and GH-Secretagogue-receptor modulation, Scientific World
Journal. 2006;6:1-11
Golf, S. W., et al., Plasma aldosterone, cortisol and electrolyte concentrations in physical exercise
after magnesium supplementation, J Clin Chem Clin Biochem. 1984;22 (11):717-721
Golf, S. W., et al., On the significance of magnesium in extreme physical stress, Cardiovasc Drugs
Ther. 1998;12(Suppl 2):197-202
Gorąca, A., et al., Lipoic acid—biological activity and therapeutic potential, Pharmacol Rep. 2011;
63(4):849-58
Grossmann, R. E. and Tangpricha, V., Evaluation of vehicle substances on vitamin D
bioavailability: a systematic review, Mol Nutr Food Res. 2010;54(8):1055-61
Gulitz, A., et al., The microbial diversity of water kefir. Int J Food Microbiol. 2011;151(3):284-8
Gunnarsson, M., et al., Long-term biokinetics and radiation exposure of patients undergoing 14C-
glycocholic acid and 14C-xylose breath tests, Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2007;22(6):762-71
Günther, T., et al., Protection against salicylate ototoxicity by zinc, J Trace Elem Electrolytes
Health Dis. 1989;3(1):51-3
Halder, S., et al., Augmented humoral immune response and decreased cell-mediated immunity by
aloe vera in rats, Inflammopharmacology. 2012;20(6):343-6
Healy, E., et al., Control of salicylate intolerance with fish oils, Br J Dermatol. 2008;159(6):1368-9
Held, K., et al., Oral Mg(2+) supplementation reverses age-related neuroendocrine and sleep EEG
changes in humans, Pharmacopsychiatry. 2002;35(4):135-43
Heller, K. J., Probiotic bacteria in fermented foods: product characteristics and starter
organisms, Am J Clin Nutr. 2001;73(2 Suppl):374S-379S
Huang, R. Y., et al., Immunosuppressive effect of quercetin on dendritic cell activation and
function, J Immunol. 2010;184(12):6815-21
Hushmendy, S., et al., Select phytochemicals suppress human T-lymphocytes and mouse
splenocytes suggesting their use in autoimmunity and transplantation, Nutr Res. 2009;29(8):568-
78
Jagetia, G. C. and Aggarwal, B. B.,“Spicing up” of the immune system by curcumin, J Clin
Immunol. 2007;27(1):19-35
Janssen, P. L., et al., Salicylates in foods, Nutr Rev. 1996;54(11 Pt 1):357-9
Janssen, P. L., et al., Acetylsalicylate and salicylates in foods, Cancer Lett. 1997;114(1-2):163-4
Jirillo, E., et al., Healthy effects exerted by prebiotics, probiotics, and symbiotics with special
reference to their impact on the immune system, Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 2012;82(3):200-8
Jordan, J. L., et al., Immune activation by a sterile aqueous extract of Cordyceps sinensis:
mechanism of action, Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2008;30(1):53-70
Jurenka, J. S., Anti-inflammatory properties of curcumin, a major constituent of Curcuma longa: a
review of preclinical and clinical research, Altern Med Rev. 2009;14(2):141-53
Kawane, H., Aspirin-induced asthma and artificial flavors, Chest. 1994;106(2):654-5
Kaya, C., et al., Obesity and insulin resistance associated with lower plasma vitamin B12 in PCOS,
Reprod Biomed Online. 2009;19(5):721-6
Kiseleva, E. P., et al., The role of components of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus in
pathogenesis and serologic diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid diseases, Benef Microbes.
2011;2(2):139-54
Klaenhammer, T. R., et al., The impact of probiotics and prebiotics on the immune system, Nat Rev
Immunol. 2012;12(10):728-34
Konturek, P. C., et al., Stress and the gut: pathophysiology, clinical consequences, diagnostic
approach and treatment options, J Physiol Pharmacol. 2011;62(6):591-9
Kroboth, P. D., et al., Influence of DHEA administration on 24-hour cortisol concentrations, J Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2003;23(1):96-9
Kung, H. F., et al., Biogenic amine content, histamine-forming bacteria, and adulteration of pork
in tuna sausage products, J Food Prot. 2012;75(10):1814-22
Kverka, M. and Tlaskalova-Hogenova, H.,Two faces of microbiota in inflammatory and
autoimmune diseases: triggers and drugs, APMIS. 2013;121(5):403-21
Lao II, D., et al., Refractory clostridium difficile infection successfully treated with tigecycline,
rifaximin, and vancomycin, Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:702910
Lester, M. R., Sulfite sensitivity: significance in human health, J Am Coll Nutr. 1995;14(3):229-32
Li, J., et al., Immunosuppressive activity on the murine immune responses of glycyrol from
Glycyrrhiza uralensis via inhibition of calcineurin activity, Pharm Biol. 2010;48(10):1177-84
Lin, R. D., et al., The immuno-regulatory effects of Schisandra chinensis and its constituents on
human monocytic leukemia cells, Molecules. 2011;16(6):4836-49
Lu, J., et al., Immunosuppressive activity of 8-gingerol on immune responses in mice , Molecules.
2011;16(3):2636-45
Maintz, L., and Novak, N., Histamine and histamine intolerance, Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85(5):1185-
96
Martino, M., et al., Immunomodulation mechanism of antidepressants: interactions between
serotonin/norepinephrine balance and Th1/Th2 balance, Curr Neuropharmacol. 2012;10(2):97-123
Masson, F., et al., Histamine and tyramine production by bacteria from meat products , Int J Food
Microbiol. 1996;32(1-2):199-207
Mendoza, F. A., et al., Severe eosinophilic syndrome associated with the use of probiotic
supplements: a new entity?, Case Report Rheumatol. 2012;2012:934324
Nielsen, F. H., et al., Magnesium supplementation improves indicators of low magnesium status
and inflammatory stress in adults older than 51 years with poor quality sleep, Magnes Res.
2010;23(4):158-68
Okun, J. G., et al., S-Acetylglutathione normalizes intracellular glutathione content in cultured
fibroblasts from patients with glutathione synthetase deficiency , J Inherit Metab Dis.
2004;27(6):783-6
Olofsson, P. S., et al., Rethinking inflammation: neural circuits in the regulation of immunity,
Immunol Rev. 2012;248(1):188-204
Padayatty, S. J., et al., Human adrenal glands secrete vitamin C in response to
adrenocorticotrophic hormone, Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;86(1):145-9
Papavergou, E. J., et al., Levels of biogenic amines in retail market fermented meat products, Food
Chem. 2012;135(4):2750-5
Park, H. J., et al., Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 balance in a murine model of asthma, Int
Immunopharmacol. 2009;9(3):261-7
Paterson, J., et al., Is there a role for dietary salicylates in health?, Proc Nutr Soc. 2006;65(1):93-6
Pearson, D. J., et al., Proctocolitis induced by salicylate and associated with asthma and recurrent
nasal polyps, Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1983;287(6406):1675
Peroni, D. G. and Boner, A. L., Sulfite sensitivity, Clin Exp Allergy. 1995;25(8):680-1
Perry, C. A., et al., Health effects of salicylates in foods and drugs, Nutr Rev. 1996;54(8):225-40
Petro, T. M., Regulatory role of resveratrol on Th17 in autoimmune disease, Int Immunopharmacol.
2011;11(3):310-8
Picchietti, S., et al., Immune modulatory effects of Aloe arborescens extract on the piscine SAF-1
cell line, Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013;34(5):1335-44
Plengvidhya, V., et al., DNA fingerprinting of lactic acid bacteria in sauerkraut fermentations,
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007;73(23):7697-702
Prantera, C., et al., Rifaximin-extended intestinal release induces remission in patients with
moderately active Crohn’s disease, Gastroenterology. 2012;142(3):473-481.e4
Pyleris, E., et al., The prevalence of overgrowth by aerobic bacteria in the small intestine by small
bowel culture: relationship with irritable bowel syndrome, Dig Dis Sci. 2012;57(5):1321-9
Quigley, E. M. and Quera, R., Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: roles of antibiotics,
prebiotics, and probiotics, Gastroenterology. 2006;130(2 Suppl 1):S78-90
Quilon III, A. and Brent, L.,The primary care physician’s guide to inflammatory arthritis:
diagnosis, J Musculoskel Med. 2010;27:223-231
Raithel, M., et al., Significance of salicylate intolerance in diseases of the lower gastrointestinal
tract, J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005;56(Suppl 5):89-102
Rapin, J. R. and Wiernsperger, N., Possible links between intestinal permeability and food
processing: a potential therapeutic niche for glutamine, Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2010;65(6):635-643
Rosania, R., et al., Effect of probiotic or prebiotic supplementation on antibiotic therapy in the
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: a comparative evaluation, Curr Clin Pharmacol.
2013;8(2):169-72
Rowan, N. J., et al., Production of diarrheal enterotoxins and other potential virulence factors by
veterinary isolates of bacillus species associated with nongastrointestinal infections, Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2003;69(4):2372-6
Santamaria, A., et al., One-year effects of myo-inositol supplementation in postmenopausal women
with metabolic syndrome, Climacteric. 2012;15(5):490-5
Santini, F., et al., In vitro assay of thyroid disruptors affecting TSH-stimulated adenylate cyclase
activity, J Endocrinol Invest. 2003;26(10):950-5
Schroecksnadel, S., et al., Sensitivity to sulphite additives, Clin Exp Allergy. 2010;40(4):688-9
Shakibaei, M., et al., Resveratrol addiction: to die or not to die, Mol Nutr Food Res.
2009;53(1):115-28
Shalaby, A. R., Significance of biogenic amines to food safety and human health, Food Res Int.
1996;29(7):675-90
Sheedy, J. R., et al., Increased d-lactic Acid intestinal bacteria in patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome, In Vivo. 2009;23(4):621-8
Simon, R. A., Update on sulfite sensitivity, Allergy. 1998;53(46 Suppl):78-9
Singh, N., et al., An overview on ashwagandha: a Rasayana (rejuvenator) of Ayurveda, Afr J Tradit
Complement Altern Med. 2011;8(5 Suppl):208-13
Sivagnanam, P., et al., Respiratory symptoms in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and the
impact of dietary salicylates, Dig Liver Dis. 2007;39(3):232-9
Smith, J. P., et al., Low-dose naltrexone therapy improves active Crohn’s disease , Am J
Gastroenterol. 2007;102(4):820-8
Sood, A., et al., The probiotic preparation, VSL#3 induces remission in patients with mild-to-
moderately active ulcerative colitis, Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;7(11):1202-9
Spasov, A. A., et al., Comparative study of magnesium salts bioavailability in rats fed a
magnesium-deficient diet, Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2010;(2):29-37
Stojiljković, V., et al., Glutathione redox cycle in small intestinal mucosa and peripheral blood of
pediatric celiac disease patients, An Acad Bras Cienc. 2012;84(1):175-84
Su, K. P., Mind-body interface: the role of n-3 fatty acids in psychoneuroimmunology, somatic
presentation, and medical illness comorbidity of depression, Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2008;17(Suppl
1):151-7
Taty Anna, K., et al., Anti-inflammatory effect of Curcuma longa (turmeric) on collagen-induced
arthritis: an anatomico-radiological study, Clin Ter. 2011;162(3):201-7
Teoh, A. L., et al., Yeast ecology of Kombucha fermentation, Int J Food Microbiol. 2004;95(2):119-
26
Tripathi, S., et al., Ginger extract inhibits LPS induced macrophage activation and function, BMC
Complement Altern Med. 2008;8:1
Tveito, K., et al., 13C-xylose and 14C-xylose breath tests for the diagnosis of coeliac disease,
Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008;43(2):166-73
Ukil, A., et al., Curcumin, the major component of food flavour turmeric, reduces mucosal injury
in trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid-induced colitis, Br J Pharmacol. 2003;139(2):209-18
Vally, H., et al., Clinical effects of sulphite additives, Clin Exp Allergy. 2009;39(11):1643-51
Veerappan, G. R., et al., Probiotics for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, Curr
Gastroenterol Rep. 2012;14(4):324-33
Visciano, P., et al., Biogenic amines in raw and processed seafood, Front Microbiol. 2012;3:188
Vojdani, A., Detection of IgE, IgG, IgA and IgM antibodies against raw and processed food
antigens, Nutr Metab (Lond). 2009;6:22
Vyas, U. and Ranganathan, N., Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics: gut and beyond, Gastroenterol
Res Pract. 2012;2012:872716
Wantke, F., et al., Histamine-free diet: treatment of choice for histamine-induced food intolerance
and supporting treatment for chronic headaches, Clin Exp Allergy. 1993;23(12):982-5
Weeks, B. S., Formulations of dietary supplements and herbal extracts for relaxation and
anxiolytic action: Relarian, Med Sci Monit. 2009;15(11):RA256-62
Wood, A., et al., A systematic review of salicylates in foods: estimated daily intake of a Scottish
population, Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011;55(Suppl 1):S7-S14
Yang, Y., et al., Resveratrol induces the suppression of tumor-derived CD4+CD25+ regulatory T
cells, Int Immunopharmacol. 2008;8(4):542-7
Younger, J., et al., Low-dose naltrexone for the treatment of fibromyalgia: findings of a small,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, counterbalanced, crossover trial assessing daily
pain levels, Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65(2):529-38
Zhao, G. J., et al., Curcumin inhibits suppressive capacity of naturally occurring CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells in mice in vitro, Int Immunopharmacol. 2012;14(1):99-106

Chapter 9:
The Long Haul
Bahna, S. L., Food challenge procedure: optimal choices for clinical practice, Allergy Asthma
Proc. 2007;28(6):640-6
Carlé, A., et al., Graves’ hyperthyroidism and moderate alcohol consumption: evidence for disease
prevention, Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013;79(1):111-9
Galdos, D. M. M. V., Quantification of soy isoflavones in commercial eggs and their transfer from
poultry feed into eggs and tissues, M.Sc. Thesis, The Ohio State University, 2009
Han, D. Y., et al., Environmental factors in the development of chronic inflammation: a case-
control study on risk factors for Crohn’s disease within New Zealand, Mutat Res. 2010;690(1-
2):116-22
Herman, P. N. and Drost, L. M., Evaluating the Clinical Relevance of Food Sensitivity Tests: A
Single-Subject Experiment, Altern Med Rev. 2004;9(2):198-207
Järvinen, K. M. and Sicherer, S. H., Diagnostic oral food challenges: procedures and biomarkers, J
Immunol Methods. 2012;383(1-2):30-8
Kiyohara, C., et al., Cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, and risk of systemic lupus
erythematosus: a case-control study in a Japanese population, J Rheumatol. 2012;39(7):1363-70
Land, M. H., et al., Oral Desensitization for Food Hypersensitivity, Immunol Allergy Clin North
Am. 2011;31(2):367-376
Rasouli, B., et al., Alcohol consumption is associated with reduced risk of type 2 diabetes and
autoimmune diabetes in adults: results from the Nord-Trøndelag health study , Diabet Med.
2013;30(1):56-64
Swanson, G. R., et al., Is moderate red wine consumption safe in inactive inflammatory bowel
disease?, Digestion. 2011;84(3):238-44
Tomicić, S., et al., Dysregulated Th1 and Th2 responses in food-allergic children—does
elimination diet contribute to the dysregulation?, Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2010;21(4 Pt 1):649-55
Yum, H. Y., et al., Oral food challenges in children, Korean J Pediatr. 2011;54(1):6-10
Preview of The Paleo Approach Cookbook


An estimated 50 million Americans suffer from some form of autoimmune disease. If you’re among
them, you may know all too well how little modern medicine can do to alleviate your condition. But
that’s no reason to give up hope. In this companion cookbook to the groundbreaking book The Paleo
Approach, Sarah D. Ballantyne, PhD, shows you just how easy and delicious regaining your health
can be.
      The Paleo Approach Cookbook walks you through which foods you should eat to calm your
immune system, reduce inflammation, and help your body heal itself. There’s no need to worry that
“going Paleo” will break the bank or require too much time in the kitchen preparing special foods. In
The Paleo Approach Cookbook, Dr. Ballantyne provides expert tips on how to make the switch
easily and economically. She explains how to stay within your food budget, how to make the best use
of your time in the kitchen, and where to shop for what you need. Complete food lists, shopping
guides, and meal plans take the guesswork out of eating to maximize healing.
      Don’t know how to cook? Dr. Ballantyne walks you through essential kitchen techniques, from
chopping vegetables to using a pressure cooker safely. Armed with more than 150 delicious recipes,
from breakfast staples to decadent desserts, you can reverse your disease and love every bite!
      Available in stores in Spring 2014.
      Enjoy these sneak-peak recipes from The Paleo Approach Cookbook!


Breakfast Sausage             (Serves 10–20)




INGREDIENTS:

    5 lbs ground pork
    1 Tbsp salt
    1 Tbsp ground or dried sage
    1/2 tsp ground ginger
    1 1/2 tsp mace
    1 1/2 tsp dried thyme
DIRECTIONS:

 1. Combine spices in a spice grinder and grind until you have a fine powder. You can also use a
    mortar and pestle, clean coffee grinder, mini blender, or mini food processor.
 2. Add spices to ground meat. Mix in bowl of a standing mixer on low for 3–4 minutes, or mix by
    hand to completely incorporate spices into meat.
 3. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate overnight or up to 24 hours.
 4. Cook as patties or loose sausage, or stuff into casings.




Barbecue Sauce
                                                                                  (Serves 8–12)




INGREDIENTS:

    2 Tbsp red palm oil
    1 large sweet onion, diced
    1 apple, peeled and grated
    1/4 cup molasses
    1/3 cup apple cider vinegar
    1 Tbsp grated fresh ginger
    1 1/2 Tbsp fish sauce
    1/4 tsp mace
    1 clove garlic, crushed
    1 tsp turmeric
    Pinch cinnamon
DIRECTIONS:

    Heat palm oil in a saucepan over medium-high heat. Add onion and sauté 10–15 minutes until
    onion is caramelized.
    Add rest of ingredients. Bring to a boil, then reduce heat to maintain a simmer. Simmer
    uncovered for 15 minutes.
    Remove from heat and purée with an immersion blender. Use as a marinade and as a serving
    sauce!




Roasted Broccoflower
                                                                                    (Serves 4–8)




INGREDIENTS:
8 cups broccoflower florets and stems (or substitute broccoli or cauliflower)
1/4 cup avocado oil
6–8 cloves garlic, crushed
Zest of 1 lemon (about 2 tsp)
1/4 tsp salt (or truffle salt)
1/4 cup chopped fresh parsley

DIRECTIONS:


 1. Preheat oven to 450ºF.
 2. Toss broccoflower florets with avocado oil, garlic, lemon zest, and salt in a casserole dish.
 3. Roast for 25–40 minutes until broccoflower is fully cooked (depending on how big your florets
    are and how soft you like them), stirring once halfway.
 4. Remove from oven, toss with fresh parsley, and serve.
Carob Ganache Mini Torte




INGREDIENTS:
2/3 cup coconut milk
1/3 cup extra-virgin coconut oil
2 Tbsp pure vanilla or 1/2 Tbsp vanilla powder
1/3 cup carob powder
Dash cinnamon

INGREDIENTS:


 1. Bring coconut milk, coconut oil, and vanilla to a low simmer in a small saucepan over medium-
    low heat. If you’re using pure vanilla, let it simmer 5–10 minutes to burn off the majority of the
    alcohol from the vanilla, stirring frequently.
 2. Pour coconut milk mixture into a blender. Add carob and cinnamon. Blend 30 seconds–1 minute
    to thoroughly combine.
 3. Pour into individual ramekins, silicone molds, or a large serving dish. Chill until set, 3–4 hours.
 4. Enjoy plain or serve with berries.




Lemon and Thyme-Broiled Salmon with Blood Orange Salsa




INGREDIENTS:
salsa:
2 lbs blood oranges, segmented
Juice and zest of 1 lime
1/2 red onion, finely diced
3 stalks celery, finely diced
1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro
salmon:
1/4 cup fresh lemon juice
1 Tbsp lemon zest
1 Tbsp chopped fresh thyme
1/2 cup white wine (or orange juice or apple juice)
four–six 6- to 8-oz salmon fillets

DIRECTIONS:

For salsa:


 1. Combine salsa ingredients in a bowl and refrigerate until it’s time to serve.



For salmon:


 1. Combine lemon juice, zest, thyme, and wine. Pour over salmon fillets in a resealable bag or
    container. Marinate 15 minutes.
 2. Meanwhile, adjust oven rack so that salmon will be 6–8 inches from the top element in the stove.
    Preheat broiler for 10 minutes. Line a baking sheet with foil.
 3. Remove salmon from marinade and place on prepared baking sheet. (If your salmon fillets have
    skin, lay them skin side down.) Discard remaining marinade.
 4. Broil 9–12 minutes until opaque throughout and segments flake apart easily. Serve with salsa.
Testimonials

The Paleo Approach has literally saved my life. At the age of 36, standing 5’9” and weighing 319
pounds, I was not only obese, I was morbidly obese. My increasing health problems were not going
to go away with medication; in fact they were only going to get worse. I tried almost everything to
lose the weight, and the scale would not budge. I was even gluten-free for over 5 years and gained 30
pounds. It wasn’t until I committed 100% to the Paleo Approach that the weight started to melt off.
     —Cari Driscoll

Before I found the Paleo Approach, I felt helpless and confused. My symptoms were making me
miserable, but I didn’t know what advice to follow. Implementing advice from the Paleo Approach
has resolved my symptoms, and I am now in the process of healing; but more importantly, Sarah
Ballantyne helped me to understand the whys. I feel empowered.
     —Rachael Murray

When I first started healing my rheumatoid arthritis through diet, I turned to GAPS (very similar to
full Paleo). It took me out of crisis, reducing both the intensity and frequency of painful joint flares,
but there remained a level of inflammation that wouldn’t go away. With the help of the Paleo
Approach, I learned I have a sensitivity to both nightshades and nuts. That information was the
missing piece that took my healing to a new level.
      —Eileen Laird

Shortly after my MS diagnosis, I decided that I did not want to be on the toxic medications that were
prescribed to me. I dove headfirst into research alternatives and stumbled upon a Dr. Cordain video
on the relationship between Paleo and MS. I implemented the Paleo diet almost immediately, and
after 6 months of following the diet and shifting my lifestyle, I began to see my symptoms fade. As I
learned more about the Paleo Approach, I experimented with eliminating nightshades, etc., and I’m
happy to say I haven’t had a relapse in over 4 years. I’m back to practicing yoga regularly, and just
started CrossFit.
      —Marie-Theres Franke

After 8 months of following a Paleo diet I felt healthier, but my insomnia and night sweats had not
gone away. When I found out that Hashimoto’s patients often have additional food intolerances, I
decided to cut out nightshades because they appeared to be the most common culprit. Just one week
later, my sleep issues disappeared completely, and I felt completely renewed as a person.
      —Daniel Thrall

I’ve been 60-90% Paleo for over 4 years, but when I was diagnosed with Hashimoto’s, I started the
Paleo Approach. Travel was one of my biggest concerns. But with practice and planning it has gotten
easier and easier and totally doable. Now I pack an ice chest and show up at friends’ homes with all
kinds of yummy foods and grass-fed meats to start sharing and cooking for us once I arrive. Thinking
I’d be the problem guest with special needs, I’ve become the ever appreciated guest who has also
raised their consciousness about nutrient-dense real food.
     —Deanna Leah
Completely unaware of which foods were causing me problems, the Paleo Approach was the
template that I needed to finally make sense of the immune system-diet connection and take significant
strides toward gaining control over my health. I’ve been following the protocol for almost an entire
year and, due in large part to it, have returned to the running and weight training that I loved to do
before my symptoms forced me to quit, and am now finally able to fully enjoy raising my 4-year-old
daughter as a stay-at-home dad.
     —Justin Bartholomew

Both of my children, 2.5 years and 10 months old, have my digestive issues. We are still trying to
diagnose what the exact problem is with all three of us, but utilizing the Paleo Approach as a
foundational tool I have been able to rotate the allowable foods to find which foods cause the most
trouble. We use the groups of foods, like FODMAPS, to find groups of foods that work or don’t
work. We are getting closer and closer to figuring out why we are healing so slowly, but I could not
have gotten this far without the structure and information provided by Sarah Ballantyne.
     —Brittany Dickerson

I had suffered with psoriasis for almost 5 years and experienced minor improvements when I went
dairy and gluten free. In 2011, I stumbled onto the Paleo diet and saw improvements again, but it
wasn’t until I was introduced to the Paleo Approach that I took my diet a step further and 10 weeks
later saw a remission in my psoriasis symptoms. Sarah Ballantyne has been an invaluable resource,
and I know you will agree after seeing your personal results!
      —Christie Stallings
